The Project Gutenberg EBook of Farthest North, by Charles Lanman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Farthest North
       The Life and Explorations of Lieutenant James Booth
       Lockwood, of the Greely Arctic Expedition

Author: Charles Lanman

Release Date: January 18, 2017 [EBook #54019]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FARTHEST NORTH ***




Produced by Marcia Brooks, Stephen Hutcheson, and the
online Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net






[Illustration: J. B. Lockwood U S A]




                            FARTHEST NORTH;


                                  OR,

 _THE LIFE AND EXPLORATIONS OF LIEUTENANT JAMES BOOTH LOCKWOOD, OF THE
                       GREELY ARCTIC EXPEDITION_.


                                   BY
                            CHARLES LANMAN.


                               NEW YORK:
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,
                        1, 3, AND 5 BOND STREET.
                                 1885.


_When we think of the adventure of our times; when we recall the great
Arctic explorations that have called forth an endurance and daring which
have been unsurpassed in other days; . . . what is there that is more
romantic than they are in any history of any age?_

                                         _From a Thanksgiving Sermon by_
                                                   Rev. Phillips Brooks.


                            Copyright, 1885,
                      By D. APPLETON AND COMPANY.




                                PREFACE.


It is believed that this book, with its true but none the less stirring
adventures, will be of much interest to the general public, as well as
gratifying to the many warm friends of Lieutenant Lockwood. It will
likewise correct any erroneous impressions which may have arisen from
the publication of garbled extracts from the official journals kept by
the different members of the Greely party and, by order of the War
Department, laid open to the public. By this order, Lockwood’s journal
and those of others became public property, and hence any reference to
them in advance of their official publication is allowable.

The few pages devoted to the early life can not be expected to
especially interest the general public, but will gratify Lieutenant
Lockwood’s friends. They are here produced to give them permanency, and
to show his sterling character.

No attempt is here made to give a history of the Expedition, and only so
much of Lockwood’s journal is produced as shows his connection
therewith. The voyage to Lady Franklin Bay is given more in detail, as
it presents a lively picture of an interesting people not much known,
and as it exhibits the buoyant spirits with which he entered upon the
work, before dissensions in camp had checked them, though without
marring his faithfulness and energy. The important part he had in the
enterprise, his zeal, energy, and loyalty to his chief and to the cause,
all are fully set forth, and will be more clearly seen when the more
elaborate history of the Expedition shall be published by Lieutenant
Greely, as will shortly be done.

Although the journal has been freely used, its language and style have
not been closely followed, except in those parts quoted which refer to
Lockwood’s sentiments and feelings. The deep pathos of these could be
expressed as well in no other words.

His journal is very full and complete on the perilous boat-voyage to
Cape Sabine, and in the heart-rending struggle for life in that
ever-memorable hut where he and so many others laid down their lives.
This has purposely been reduced to a few pages, giving the story only so
far as Lieutenant Lockwood was connected with it. The same, may be said
as to the home-life at the station on Lady Franklin Bay.

The portrait of Lieutenant Lockwood is from an excellent photograph
taken a short time before he started for St. John’s, and two of the
woodcuts are from photographs by Sergeant Rice. “Arctic Sledging” was
made up from a description and a sketch by Sergeant Brainard, and
“Farthest North” from a sketch by Lieutenant Lockwood.

The map is a reproduction of that published by the London Geographical
Society, which is an exact transcript of maps drawn by Lieutenant
Lockwood and submitted by him to Lieutenant Greely with reports of
sledge-journeys. This map gives the names agreed upon by Lieutenant
Greely and Lieutenant Lockwood, and are those referred to in the journal
and in this book. It is much to be regretted that many of these names
differ from those on the official map published by authority to the
world. The names first given commemorate events connected with those
wonderful sledge-journeys, as will be seen in the text; and, if a few
unimportant lakes and points were named after friends and relatives,
this might have been conceded to one who accomplished so much, and that
much so well. The map of the London Geographical Society will probably
live, and the other perish, as it should.

Captain Markham, Royal Navy, soon after the return of the Greely
Expedition, declared, in articles published in a leading English
magazine, that Lockwood never got beyond Cape Britannia, and that he
mistook Cape May for that cape, etc. It was thought that, when the
history of this sledge-journey was better known, Markham would be glad
to withdraw this ungenerous aspersion. This is done so far as to admit
that Lockwood did reach 83° 24′ north latitude, 44° 5′ west longitude;
but it is now said, in the article “Polar Regions,” of the new
Encyclopædia Britannica, written by the captain’s brother, that all this
region had previously been explored and exhaustively examined by the
English expedition of 1875-’76.

This is very remarkable, in view of the fact that Lockwood Island, which
was reached by Lockwood, is one hundred geographical miles east and
forty miles north of Cape Britannia which Beaumont saw at the distance
of twenty miles, but never reached.

In the same article are expressed sentiments in accord with those
contained in this book, viz.: “If the simple and necessary precaution
had been taken of stationing a depot-ship in a good harbor at the
entrance of Smith’s Sound, in annual communication with Greely on one
side and with America on the other, there would have been no disaster.
If precautions proved to be necessary by experience are taken, there is
no undue risk or danger in polar enterprises. There is no question as to
the value and importance of polar discovery, and as to the principles on
which expeditions should be sent out. Their objects are exploration for
scientific purposes and the encouragement of maritime enterprise.”




                               CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE
  I. Early Life                                                        7
  II. Army-Life in Arizona                                            20
  III. Army-Life in Nebraska                                          31
  IV. Army-Life in Kansas                                             43
  V. Army-Life in Indian Territory and Colorado                       52
  VI. Preparing for the Arctic Regions                                58
  VII. From Newfoundland to Lady Franklin Bay                         64
  VIII. House-building and Local Explorations                         87
  IX. Preliminary Sledge Expeditions and Life at the Station         111
  X. “The Arctic Moon”                                               132
  XI. Expedition to Lockwood Island                                  139
  XII. From Lockwood Island to Lady Franklin Bay                     178
  XIII. Waiting and Watching                                         194
  XIV. Resuming a Desperate Struggle                                 229
  XV. Across Grinnell Land                                           249
  XVI. Preparing for Home                                            279
  XVII. Homeward Bound                                               286
  XVIII. The Final Catastrophe                                       296
  XIX. The Woeful Return                                             317




                             ILLUSTRATIONS.


  Portrait of James B. Lockwood.
  Lockwood, Natives, and Kyack at Disco, Greenland.
  Sledging over the Arctic Floe.
  Taking Observations at Lockwood Island.
  Lockwood’s Corner.
  Map showing Lockwood’s Explorations.




                            FARTHEST NORTH.




                                   I.
                              EARLY LIFE.


In the following pages, it is proposed to record the personal history of
an American hero whose fortune it was, at the sacrifice of his life, to
visit and explore the utmost limit in the Arctic regions ever attained
by human skill and enterprise. Aside from the information communicated
to me by his family, the materials placed in my hands consist of his
private correspondence and various journals which he faithfully kept
while serving his country on the Western frontiers, as well as in the
inhospitable domain of the North. As the poet Fitz-Greene Halleck wrote
about a kindred character—

  “He lived, as mothers wish their sons to live,”

and, on the score of fidelity to duty,

  “He died, as fathers wish their sons to die,”

leaving a name that will long be honored in every civilized land as that
of a martyr in the cause of geographical exploration.

Many of those connected with the Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland,
before the civil war, will remember a playful and mischievous boy, whose
ready smile and cheerful ways beguiled them in their hours of
relaxation. Others who were at that school after the war will remember
the same boy, grown into a youth of sixteen years, rugged in aspect,
devoted to manly sports, and assiduous in all his duties. It is the
story of his brief but eventful life to which this volume is devoted,
written for the information of his friends and all those who admire true
heroism and rare abilities when allied to sufferings for the public
weal.

James Booth Lockwood was the second son and third child of General Henry
H. Lockwood and Anna Booth Lockwood. He was born at the Naval Academy,
Annapolis, on the 9th of October, 1852, at which time and place his
father—a Professor of Mathematics in the Navy—instructed the midshipmen
in the military branches, as he had done for many years before. Both his
parents were from the State of Delaware, and came from the best stock of
that State; and, as his father taught his students “how to shoot,” and
prepare themselves for the conflicts of life, it was quite natural that
the son should have acquired a love of noble deeds and adventure.

Like many boys, he had his narrow escapes from death, one of which
occurred in April, 1860, when, having fallen into the river from the
dock, he was rescued in an insensible condition, and restored to life
with great difficulty. This escape must have been recalled by him with
special emotion in after-years amid his struggles with the ice of
Smith’s Sound.

His innate love of fun had been one of his characteristics from
childhood, nor was it subdued even when recovering from the accident
which nearly cost him his life; for, while lying in his bed, he peered
into his father’s face with a quizzical smile, and remarked, “I was
drowned, but not drowned dead.”

When the Naval Academy was occupied by a general of the army, in 1861,
and the students and professors were transferred to Newport, Rhode
Island, young Lockwood accompanied his father and family, and was placed
at a public school in that place. After a brief residence in Newport,
his father, being a graduate of the Military Academy at West Point, was
called upon to command a volunteer regiment of Delaware troops, and
having been subsequently commissioned a brigadier-general of volunteers,
he was placed in charge of the Eastern Shore counties of Virginia and
returned to the region of hostilities, making his headquarters at
Drummondtown, in Accomac County. In this quaint and quiet place, and
while a mere stripling of ten years, young Lockwood displayed his love
of adventure and active life by forming a company of all the colored
boys in the village, erecting earthworks in a vacant lot, and, all armed
with corn-stalks and broom-handles, meeting a company of white boys in
mimic war—noisy, if not dangerous to life or limb. The vanity of
personal strife, however, soon becoming irksome to his mind, he turned
his attention to horsemanship, and explored the surrounding shores of
Accomac on a Chincoteague pony belonging to his father. He also spent
many quiet hours conversing about horses and their habits with the
soldiers in the garrison, with whom he was a special favorite. After a
while, his father was transferred to the command of troops at Harper’s
Ferry, and there a new field of adventure occupied the attention of the
incipient hero. He was foremost in climbing the neighboring
mountain-heights and scaling precipices, and always on the lookout for
adventure along the waters of the Potomac. Afterward, when living with
his family near the city of Baltimore, he displayed his activity and
energy in other ways. When neighboring boys were wont to trespass on his
father’s grounds and fruit-trees, he was quite as ready to defend his
home as he had been in Accomac to maintain the national struggle then
rending the land. And here it was that he often accompanied his father
on his rounds among the military works near Baltimore, and always
attracted the attention of the troops by his skill in riding. But these
experiences were not deemed satisfactory for molding the character of a
boy, and then it was that his father sent him to a boarding-school at
Bethlehem, in Pennsylvania, kept by a Mr. Schwartz, a good scholar and
strict disciplinarian. Of course, like those of all boys, his letters
teemed with complaints. He was _very homesick_—a mere child separated
from all he loved. In one letter he spoke of praying to God to make him
satisfied. In after-years, and when suffering all the horrors of the
Arctic, his mother’s prayer was that his childhood’s star might again
arise, and lead his sorrowing heart to that comfort found only above.
His chief grievances were a Dutch dish regularly given to the boys,
called _scrapul_, and the discipline of _powers_ administered to those
who failed in their studies. In this latter punishment, the delinquent
was required to raise to the fortieth, fiftieth, or one hundredth power
any number given him. However distasteful to him at the time, he seems
to have changed his mind upon the subjects of food and discipline
afterward; for he became, after his return home, a strong advocate of
_scrapul_ as a physical, and of “powers” as a mental diet. Returning, in
1866, with his father to Annapolis, he was sent to St. John’s College in
that place, and at that time in a flourishing condition, under the able
administration of James C. Welling, now the accomplished President of
Columbian College. Although his mental abilities were acknowledged as
superior, he preferred action to books, and his success there was not
satisfactory to his father. Others known to be his mental inferiors took
a higher stand. He, however, read some Latin, and made considerable
progress in mathematics. Here we come to a new illustration of his
character. During his residence within the walls of the Academy, a
species of tyranny existed among the sons of naval officers of his own
age with whom he associated, which he could not endure. Rank in the
father was supposed to give rank or prestige to the son. This theory
young Lockwood was unwilling to acknowledge, and the consequence was
that he soon found himself beset by those whom he opposed. But then, as
always with the free and brave, right prevailed, and the aggressors were
sent to the wall, while the fearless victor very soon became the peer of
his associates. The situation of the Academy offering peculiar
facilities for boating, fishing, swimming, etc., the professor’s son
became an expert in all these exercises, making pets of his sail and row
boats, as he had done with the ponies of Chincoteague. Many of the
Annapolis students, now high officers in the navy, have spoken of his
frolicsome pranks at that time within the grounds of the Academy—for
example, how he mimicked the strut of the drum-major, how he teased the
watchman by hiding among the trees and bushes, personating an intruder
on the grounds, and how he alarmed the servant-maids and the children by
appearing suddenly before them like a phantom. He was more fond of
reading than of study, and among his favorite books were those of De
Foe, Mayne Reid, and others of that class. To what extent he was
familiar with the histories of John Ledyard and Joseph R. Bellot can not
be stated, but there is a striking similarity in their characters, and
indeed it was the fate of the latter, like Lockwood, to lose his life in
the Arctic regions. They form a trio of remarkable explorers, whose fame
will be perennial, but it was the fate of the last one mentioned to
reach the highest success. During the latter part of his residence at
Annapolis, he spent many of his spare hours on his father’s farm. By way
of encouragement, his father assigned to him a patch of ground for his
special cultivation, with fertilizers and the use of a team. To the
surprise of all, his success seemed amazing, and his crops were good and
profitable. With the money thus secured he purchased for himself a watch
and a sporting gun. He had a special fondness for dogs, and exerted over
them great influence. His favorite in this direction was a short-legged,
long-bodied, common rat-terrier. In the purity of this dog’s blood, he
was a decided believer, which faith he maintained with many hot
arguments, and exemplified by teaching the animal a great variety of
tricks. Indeed, the high degree of training to which he brought the dog
Jack was remarkable. He was always quiet and positive toward the animal,
and Jack gave his commands a serious and implicit obedience. One of the
feats performed by the dog was to carry a candlestick with a lighted
candle wherever ordered to do so. Another was to this effect: the boy
would place a small scrap of paper on the parlor wall at a height which
Jack was hardly able to reach. Jack’s attention would then be called to
the paper, and the dog and master would retire up-stairs. Some time
afterward, Jack, in obedience to a mere word, would proceed to the
parlor, and, to the amusement of those congregated there, launch his
body at the paper until he finally secured it, and then would carry it
to his master. Although this dog had a special dislike for fire, he
would, under orders, pull chestnuts out of the hot coals, even if it
took him an hour to perform the task; and it is also related of him that
on one occasion, when he slipped his muzzle on the Academy grounds, he
picked it up and took it to his master. When the lad’s father was
ordered to the National Observatory, the family removing to Washington,
the pet dog accompanied them, and the intimacy between the dog and his
master was unabated. They often rambled through the streets together,
and it was during one of their walks along Pennsylvania Avenue that the
dog disappeared, and was never recovered by his owner, whose grief was
most sincere and manifest. He published an advertisement, and, true to
his regard for the departed, he spoke of it as a pure-blooded animal;
which statement was probably the reason why the dog was never returned,
as no stranger could have believed in the alleged pedigree of such an
ungainly creature.

After young Lockwood’s father and family had become settled in
Washington, it was decided that he should return to Annapolis and take
charge of the farm until some more suitable or congenial employment
should come into view. In looking over the home letters which he wrote
at that time, I find a few developments of character which are worthy of
mention. For example, in February, 1872, he writes as follows:

“I find Annapolis the same as ever. It would hardly do for Rip Van
Winkle to go to sleep here, for, when he awoke, he would find no change,
not even by death.”

After speaking in the same letter of a man going to purchase implements
in Baltimore, he says: “I think it would pay one capable of judging of
such things, or one endowed with ‘Lockwood Common Sense,’” this allusion
being to an imaginary manual which the children had attributed to their
father. The quiet humor of the youthful farmer is manifested in another
letter after this fashion: “I have been suffering all the week from the
effects of a poison most probably communicated from some vine. It
manifests itself pretty much as Job’s troubles showed themselves, and no
position of body except standing affords relief. I haven’t yet got down
into the ashes. If tartar emetic produced these eruptions, they might be
attributed in some way to the evil agency of Mrs. W——.”

The person here alluded to was the one who became notorious for the
alleged poisoning of General W. S. Ketcham, in Baltimore. Young Lockwood
had met her at a boarding-house in Annapolis after her release from
prison, and was agreeably impressed by her conversation and manners. On
a subsequent occasion, when visiting his family in Washington, and some
severe remark had been made against the lady in question, he demanded
that the company present should not abuse an absent friend in his
presence. Being of a sensitive nature in regard to the weather, as is
proved by several of his Annapolis letters, and by such passages as the
one now to be quoted, it seems surprising that he should ever have
decided to visit the icy regions of the North.

“This gloomy weather,” he says, “is by no means calculated to elate
one’s spirits, but, on the contrary, makes everything appear in its most
dreary and desolate light, especially on a farm like this, and, though
the spring will bring more work and attention, yet I shall hail its
appearance with joy. I must confess that I can not prevent a feeling of
loneliness from coming over me, particularly in the daytime, for at
night my lamp and open wood-fire make things more cheerful, or rather
less dreary.”

As these letters were written from a farm, and by a mere boy, they are
chiefly devoted to asking for advice as to how he should manage affairs,
and to reporting the condition of the crops; but, in their way, they
prove that there was much solid manhood in the lad, and that he looked
upon life as something substantial, and not as a kind of dreamland.

On one occasion, when visiting his home, he noticed that one of his
sisters was manifesting what he thought an unreasonable excitement about
the advent of cockroaches in the kitchen, whereupon he drew the figure
of a vessel under full sail, beneath which he wrote the following: “The
brig Anna Baby, bound to the north pole for a load of cockroaches.”

On another occasion, after consulting the family copy of Webster’s
Dictionary, he wrote upon one of the fly-leaves, opposite the
indorsements of Henry Clay, Daniel Webster, and other distinguished men,
these words: “I regard this dictionary as very good, especially when you
can not get any other.”

These incidents, though unimportant, help us to appreciate the character
of the critical and independent youth.

The following example of the boy’s ingenuity is also worth mentioning:

In 1870 a brother-in-law gave him a small, cheap clock, about four and a
half inches in diameter, which he at once adapted to the purpose of
waking himself in the morning. After joining the slats of his bed
together with battens, he sawed them through in the middle and hinged
the parts. That half of the arrangement which was at the head of the bed
was supported only by a single prop. A minute collar of lead was
supported by one of the hands of the clock. At the proper time the lead
slipped from the hand automatically, and, in falling, set in motion a
system of levers which were connected with the prop by a string. Thus,
with unfailing regularity, the prop was jerked from its place, and the
young occupant of the bed was pitched headlong to the floor among his
pillows and bolster. When he tired of this apparatus, it became his
custom at night to hitch a string around his foot, the end of the string
being passed out of the window and allowed to trail down to the
kitchen-door. At a definite time in the morning, previously ordered, the
colored cook pulled the string until she received intimation of a
successful result.

In the hope of finding more congenial employment, young Lockwood now
fixed his mind on engineer work in connection with railroads. He joined
a corps on the Texas and Pacific Railroad line, and went to the
northeastern corner of the State of Texas, where, for four months, he
drove pegs and cut down bushes in the virgin wilderness, which
employment was only terminated by the failure of the company to go on
with its enterprise. What with the rough people with whom he was
compelled to associate, the hard fare at the rude taverns, and a severe
attack of sickness, he had a very disagreeable experience, which was
enhanced by the non-payment of wages by the company, and by the
temporary loss of the spare money furnished by his father, which was
taken from him by the rascality of a pretended friend, an employé of the
railroad company. By careful financial engineering, he managed to leave
the wilderness of Texas, went to Shreveport, and thence to New Orleans,
where he took a steamer for Cincinnati, and on this trip he met with one
small bit of good fortune. Owing to his limited means he contracted with
the captain of the steamer that he should be carried to Cincinnati, O.,
for a specific sum, all his meals to be included in the passage-money.
It so happened, however, that the steamer was detained by floating ice
for three weeks, but this caused no detriment to the traveler’s pocket,
as time was not “nominated in the bond.” About eleven years after that
experience, the same traveler was fighting his way through the ice of
the Arctic seas and enduring the horrors of Cape Sabine, finding it
difficult to secure necessary rations at any price or of any quality.

On reaching home, he began the study of bookkeeping with a view to the
civil service. With others, he was examined for a position in the
Treasury Department. He passed the examination with credit, and received
a mark much above the number required for passing, but, when the
office-mark was thrown in, as was then the custom, his average was
reduced, and those who had personal influence and understood the “tricks
of the trade” became the successful applicants.




                                  II.
                         ARMY-LIFE IN ARIZONA.


After finding that farming and railroad engineering were not exactly the
employments he had fancied them to be, young Lockwood resumed his
studies under the direction of his father. Not long afterward, however,
he was seized with the idea of entering the army, and, at the very
outset of this venture for a useful life, he was met with a blending of
good and bad fortune. Securing the influence of many friends, he made a
successful appeal to the President and the War Department. He received
orders for an examination before the proper tribunal, and, out of
thirty-eight young men who were examined in Washington, he passed No. 1.
He also had a higher mark than any of those examined in other places at
the same time; hence he was entitled to the highest commission as second
lieutenant, and at one time it was resolved to give it to him; but, as
the examinations were conducted in different places and before different
boards, it was decided to settle the rank of the applicants by lot, and
Lockwood’s number was forty, instead of one to which he was justly
entitled. He was, however, promised a crack regiment, and hence became
second lieutenant in the Twenty-third Infantry, then commanded by two
officers who had gained distinction in the late war—Colonel Jefferson C.
Davis and Lieutenant-Colonel George Crook. He soon after joined the
recruiting station at New York for instruction.

The few letters that Lieutenant Lockwood wrote home from New York
contained very graphic pictures of what he there observed. His reception
at the recruiting-station was most cordial, one of the first things done
there by the recruiting-officers, to his surprise, being to bring forth
a demijohn of whisky; but from this hospitality he begged to be excused,
only one or two other young men following his example.

After a service of several weeks at the recruiting-station in New York,
he conducted recruits to the Territory of Arizona by the way of Panama.
The party left New York in November, 1873, and, on reaching San
Francisco, went by steamer to Fort Yuma, near the mouth of the Colorado
River, and thence marched over the rugged and dusty plains of Arizona to
McDowell Post, a distance of more than one hundred and fifty miles in
the interior.

From the few letters that he wrote respecting his trip from New York to
San Francisco, we gather the following items:

“Aspinwall is a dirty, sandy town, of no architectural pretensions. I
cannot better describe it than by asking you to imagine Lockwoodville[1]
with a lot of palm- and cocoanut-trees growing in the vacant lots,
plenty of the sand and filth aforesaid, all the darkies of Annapolis
sauntering around, plenty of children and many dogs, pigs, etc. However,
I must do Aspinwall justice—it has a neat little church, a marble
monument erected to some of its chief benefactors, and, what I should
call, a remarkably fine statue of Columbus, in bronze. It has an
enormous trade passing through it, from one ocean to the other, and is
really a place of great importance to the mercantile world.”

“We reached Panama between four and five in the afternoon, after a very
interesting ride across the country, and were immediately embarked for
the Constitution—which lay two miles from shore—so that I had no
opportunity of seeing Panama, except from the water. The ship left
during the evening, and ever since has been ‘plowing the angry main’
toward San Francisco, excepting when stopping at some of the towns along
the coast. We have seen several of these, and they are all of one type,
that of Aspinwall, though on a much smaller scale. Some that I saw had
not half a dozen wooden houses, but consisted merely of reed-huts
covered with straw. One of these—Mazatlan—claims to have twenty thousand
inhabitants, but does not appear to have more than one tenth of that
number. All the tropical fruits were abundant at these places, and could
be purchased for a trifle. The Constitution is a side-wheeler of four
thousand tons, and has little motion, and, while sea-sickers are
abundant, I am not one of them. I have gained ten pounds, and now weigh
one hundred and sixty-one.”

Lockwood’s stay in San Francisco was too brief to afford him much
opportunity for observation, but here is what he said of the Chinese: “I
visited Chinatown this evening, and saw the Celestials in all their
glory. I saw many strange and amusing sights in their stores and shops
and along their streets, as they are very slow in adopting civilized
customs. I send along with this some Chinese pictures which I purchased.
I am very much pleased with San Francisco, and shall leave it with many
regrets. A walk through the Chinese quarter is like a visit to some
Chinese city on the other side of the Pacific.”

The few events of his trip along the coast to Yuma were to this effect:
Soon after leaving the Golden Gate, he experienced a storm that was far
from pacific in its character, far worse than any he had witnessed since
leaving New York; he visited Magdalena Bay, which impressed him as a
barren, miserable place, chiefly noted for its want of houses, and yet
of some importance as the shipping port of a dye-wood found in that
region; he also stopped at Carmen Island, where large quantities of salt
were found in the dry bed of a lake, and at Cape St. Lucas, but brought
away no favorable impressions from any of these remote places. With Yuma
City he was better pleased, describing its houses as small, one-story
affairs, built of adobe, more Mexican than American in character, and
its streets as far more dusty than those of Washington City; and the
mountains surrounding the city as very imposing. The Colorado reminded
him of the Red River—the channel winding and running between great
mud-flats and islands, all constantly changing, and abounding in many
kinds of water-fowl. He was interested in the Indian inhabitants, whom
he pitied for their poverty and degradation; occasionally seeing a
number of squaws reclining like quadrupeds on the mud-flats or in front
of their tiny oval huts.

The sojourn of Lieutenant Lockwood in Arizona lasted into the summer of
1874, and from the letters which he wrote home from Post McDowell may be
gathered some interesting particulars, illustrating his habits of close
observation in regard to men and events.

His journey from Fort Yuma to Camp McDowell was full of interest and was
greatly enjoyed. He had for companions two brother officers and three
ladies; traveled by ambulance, making marches of only about fifteen
miles; camped out every night, Lockwood himself sleeping on the ground
outside. As the country was very desolate and barren, they traveled
generally along the valley of the Gila, but their last march was over
desert land forty-five miles wide. They saw many relics along the route,
mounds, ruins, and immense ditches for irrigation. One immense pile of
rocks, called the Painted Rocks, was entirely covered with pictures of
lizards, Indians, beasts, and birds—supposed to represent a great battle
in which the Apaches conquered the Maricopas. There were also along the
road graves of men murdered by the Indians. One grave, near Gila Bend,
was of a man named Lumley, a station-keeper, murdered by two
Mexicans—his successor exhibited a knife, used by one of the murderers,
which had been found, and he pointed out the spot where Judge Lynch had
disposed of the only criminal that happened to be captured. While the
travelers did not spend any money at hotels, they were obliged to pay
from twenty to thirty dollars for being ferried across the Gila and Salt
Rivers at different points.

In one of his letters, written to his sister after the rainy season, and
soon after his arrival at Camp McDowell, young Lockwood says: “I wish
you could see the pretty flowers around here; they are principally
yellow and red, and each kind grows by itself. They grow so close
together that the ground is covered as with a carpet. To the west of
this post there is a wide plain covered with these flowers. There is
also a species of cactus called the Suwarrow, which grows fifteen or
twenty feet high—a sort of tree without branches, but covered with
thorns; the outside of this tree is of a green color and nearly as soft
as young asparagus, but inside it has a frame of wood. These are all
over the plain, in fact all over Arizona. I often walk out here after
dinner with a large dog that belongs to one of the officers, and start
up the rabbits—great big Jack-rabbits, as they are called—as large as a
small dog. They can run very fast, faster than any dog except a hound.
Among other curiosities about here are rattlesnakes and lizards—the
lizards as common as flies; also crows as big as hens and almost as
tame. The post is entirely surrounded by mountains.” By way of contrast
to this pleasing prospect, in another letter he gives the particulars of
the murder of two men by the Indians within twelve miles of the
garrison, their bodies having been fearfully mutilated. “I am still in
the land of the finite and material,” he writes, “and the Apaches have
not yet disturbed the arrangement of my back hair; in short, I am alive
and kicking.”

On the 14th of May, Lockwood writes that “there has been nothing new at
the post except the arrival of Lieutenant Schuyler, Fifth Cavalry. He
has been out on a scout for several months past, dropping in at various
posts now and then. He reports that he came upon the Apaches southeast
of here, killed twelve and took fourteen prisoners. He is accompanied by
Dr. Corbasier and a party of thirty-one soldiers and eighty-one Indian
scouts. These scouts are composed of Apache-Mojave, Tonto-Apaches, and
other tribes, closely allied to the Apaches proper. It seems strange
that they are thus willing to join the enemy in exterminating their
brethren; but such is their nature. They are hardly superior to the
beasts, except in shape, and even there the line of demarkation is not
very distinct. The Pimos, to the number of one hundred or more, were
here about a week ago, on their way to punish the Apaches for stealing
some stock from them. When they returned, they reported the killing of
quite a number of their foes—some sixteen or more—and taking many
prisoners. Schuyler’s party confirm the report; they came across the
camp of the Apaches, and the doctor said he counted a large number of
slain. The Pimos surprised the Apaches when asleep and almost
exterminated them. They were armed with war-clubs, and of course mangled
their bodies horribly. When found their heads were all beaten in, and
their bodies stuck full of arrows and partially burned. The doctor says
it was the most sickening sight he ever beheld. The Apache bands, off
their reservations, are fast becoming exterminated, over a thousand
having been killed during the last winter. General Crook will not allow
them to return to their reservations unless they bring the heads of
several of the ringleaders in the late outbreak.”

In another place, after alluding to the extravagant accounts published
about Arizona, he says: “One would suppose, from reading the pamphlet I
send you, that Arizona is a fine agricultural country—which is absurd;
and that it contains many flourishing cities and towns, whereas even the
river-bottoms require irrigation, and the ‘cities’ are merely the nuclei
of towns.”

On one occasion, after alluding to his enjoyment of the newspapers sent
him from home, and to the early transfer of his regiment, he says: “It
would probably have been removed this spring but for the financial panic
and other commercial disasters. I suppose if the rest of the year goes
by prosperously, and nothing occurs to prolong the gingerly, penny-wise,
pound-foolish policy of Congress called economy (?), that the
Twenty-third will probably be removed next spring or fall.” And again,
he continues: “Grant appears to have obtained great credit by his veto
of the Inflation Bill. How Congress could pass a bill which seems to be
unacceptable and repugnant to the whole people, I can not understand.”

Alluding a second time to the _pleasing_ characteristics of frontier
life, he tells his father that “a party of Indian scouts arrived here
yesterday from Schuyler’s command. They brought the news that the
lieutenant had _jumped_ the Indians at Four Peaks—a high mountain, forty
miles off—killed eighteen and captured six. The party brought in a
wounded scout, shot through the head, who is now in the hospital. He was
the only one wounded in the fight, or rather slaughter, for these
Indians rarely fight a party of any size. I suppose these Arizona tribes
are the most degraded, cowardly, and despicable savages in the country.
Schuyler, as I understand, generally sweeps a breadth of country fifty
miles across, by means of flanking-parties on the right and left, and
has been quite successful.”

In speaking of his duties at the post, he says: “I am officer-of-the-day
every other day; I mount the guard every morning, attend all roll-calls,
accompany the captain in his inspection of quarters every morning, and
afterward recite tactics. I also am present with him at company-drill
every evening, command the company at Sunday morning inspection, sit on
boards of survey and perform other irregular duties.”

After announcing the arrival of the paymaster at the post, and alluding
to expenses, he says: “Servants in this country are paid enormously. The
post-trader pays his Chinese cook thirty dollars per month, and has paid
as high as one hundred dollars. Officers in Arizona are compelled from
necessity to employ soldiers in this capacity, though contrary to the
regulations.”

In one of his letters, Lieutenant Lockwood gives his opinion about some
of his father’s landed property, and then goes on after this fashion:
“The old farm has additional charms for me now, after living in Arizona,
and I have come to think that there are many worse places. Does distance
lend enchantment to the view? or what is it? I often long after some of
the delicious peaches and other fruit that the much-abused farm produces
in such abundance. However, if you can dispose of the farm as you
suggest, it will, no doubt, be for the best, as the Lockwood family have
become so _high-toned_ that I am afraid they will never _stoop_ (?) to
live on a farm and become _grangers_.”

In one of his letters written about this date, he makes the following
remark respecting his education at Annapolis: “I don’t think I care
about being present at the meeting of the alumni of my _Alma Mater_, or,
what she would be more pleased with, contributing anything in the way of
money. Enough has been thrown away in teaching me what has never been of
any use. However, the _old woman_ has my good wishes.”

In another letter, after speaking of an entertainment he had attended,
he said: “I don’t know that I should have enjoyed it, but for the
presence of a very pretty Spanish girl with whom I fell in love; she
danced charmingly, but as she could not speak a word of English, nor I a
word of Spanish, our conversation was somewhat limited.”

On the 4th of July when arrangements were commenced for removing the
Twenty-third Regiment to Yuma, the lieutenant thus touches upon the
national anniversary: “I have celebrated the day by being very busy
writing up the proceedings of a board of survey, and have a like job on
my hands for to-morrow; indeed, I shall be fully employed now till we
leave. Some of the men, however, have been otherwise employed, viz., in
parading before the guard-house with logs of wood on their backs, as the
reward of a drunken frolic. Our march to Fort Yuma will doubtless be
very disagreeable, and for two weeks we shall have dust and heat
together with the fatigue of travel; but, on the other hand, the daily
march will not be more than fifteen miles, and as we shall be well
provided, I can’t say that I look forward to it with much dread. The
wife of our captain is even now interesting herself in the culinary
arrangements, so I presume the _vitals_ will be good.” From the time of
his uttering this amusing pun until the following September, the letters
of young Lockwood give us no incidents of special interest, and we now
follow him into the State of Nebraska, his regiment having been assigned
to the favorite post of Omaha.




                                  III.
                         ARMY-LIFE IN NEBRASKA.


Having entered upon duty at the barracks of Omaha, he seems to have made
himself especially useful there, while enjoying some of the comforts of
civilization, including good society. On the 25th of September, he wrote
that he had been busy for a week as the recorder of a court-martial. “We
settled nine cases, and, while we now stand adjourned _sine die_, I
suppose the court will soon be reconvened to try half a dozen more men
against whom charges have been preferred. There have been, since my
arrival here, as many as sixty men in the guard-house, and
courts-martial are the order of the day. I have to attend drills, etc.,
every day, and hence my leisure and opportunities for visiting the town
have been limited. However, I did go last night to a concert in town
given for the benefit of the grasshopper sufferers, several of these
sufferers from the country being present. You can not realize what a
nuisance these insects are in this country. I have not yet seen them in
any numbers, or the effects of their ravages, but I am told they
sometimes actually stop the railway-trains. The incredible number of
bed-bugs in this country is another curious fact. I sleep so soundly
that they do not disturb me. They infest every house at the post, and
they are also numerous in the city, the fences between here and there
being painted in many places, ‘Go to Smith’s for the great bed-bug
buster.’” He became a favorite in the refined society of Omaha, at that
time on the confines of civilization, but appearing to him like a bit of
New York city cut off and set down in the wilderness, where, only a few
years before, the buffalo ranged in his native freedom. During his
residence at Omaha, young Lockwood was on the most friendly terms with
all his fellow-officers, with one exception. After giving his father a
very manly account of that trouble, he writes a paragraph about himself
in these words: “With regard to myself, I find this army-life about what
I expected. It has its pleasures and its crosses. I should prefer the
cavalry to the infantry, and am sorry I did not apply for that arm of
the service. I should like to remain in the army two or three years
longer, I think, and yet, with a good opening, might do better in civil
life. Promotion is very slow, and the accumulation of anything is not
easy. These, of course, are rude impressions and but half formed, but,
as you ask for impressions, I feel bound to give them just as they are.
I have not been in the army long enough to rise, nor have I had the
opportunity to gain any particular reputation, but suppose mine is as
good as the average—that is, I think I have displayed as much aptitude
for my profession as is generally exhibited by men of average ability,
for of such I regard myself—perhaps below the average. I hope this
peroration will answer your inquiries, and prove satisfactory in that
respect. Excuse the necessary egotism. I will thankfully receive any
advice or corrections which the reading of this, or your acquaintance
with my characteristics, may suggest. I feel as though I had written a
lot of foolishness; if you think so, please excuse.”

To the writer of this personal history, it seems as if such sentiments
as the above could come only from a young man endowed with the highest
instincts of ambition, honor, and true manhood, and can not but be
considered, with others of like character, as a suitable passport into
the land of Odin and the glories of Valhalla.

During his stay at Omaha, Lieutenant Lockwood was detailed by General
Ord, the commanding officer, to visit those counties of Nebraska where
grasshoppers had destroyed the crops, for the purpose of determining to
whom contributions which had been sent to the general should be given.
In this journey of several hundred miles, made in the coldest weather,
he visited the several county towns, met the citizens, and afterward
laid before the general such testimony as to the destitute, that the
bounty was distributed to the satisfaction of all. While on this duty,
he traveled ninety miles in twenty-four hours. The county people with
whom he conducted business, he designated as “Grasshoppers.” He greatly
enjoyed the prairie scenery through which he passed, especially the
valley of the Blue.

On the approach of Christmas at Omaha, our young friend had an attack of
chills and fever, which sent him to his bed. After deploring that he
could not perform his duties on the pending court-martial, he gives us
this holiday information: “Yesterday was Christmas, and I am glad that
the day comes but once a year. With a large party I was occupied until
late in the afternoon making the rounds of the many houses here at the
post. In the evening, I ate a fine dinner at General Ord’s, and on top
of that, danced in the parlor until eleven or twelve o’clock, and, as a
consequence, am coming on as officer of the guard to-day with a most
gorgeous headache. So much for Christmas. I have received two or three
presents, but have made none myself, from want of funds. I just now
heard a tremendous crash, and, on going out, found a fine lunch, sent by
Mrs. Ord, scattered on the ground, and in the midst of the _débris_ of
broken glass and china, the unfortunate bearer, who had slipped and
fallen on the ice in front of the door. I was not particularly sorry on
my own account, as I could not have eaten the good things ‘anyhow.’ Upon
the whole, Christmas has passed away as it usually does, pleasantly,
though at the expense of many unfortunate turkeys. I am sorry I could
not send home any presents, my pecuniary affairs being in a straitened
condition. I should like very much to be at home about this time. I
often wish I could hear Lidie and Anna sing, although I suppose I would
find the girls, including Julia and Mary, much changed.”

Remembering young Lockwood’s remarks about whisky-drinking in New York,
the following statement is worth quoting: “Most of the ladies at the
post received visitors on New-Year’s-day, either singly or in groups.
One marked feature of the day was the general absence of liquor, its
place being supplied by coffee, chocolate, and other refreshments of a
more solid and less stimulating character. I noticed the same thing in
town, or rather that at those places where I saw liquor, the ladies were
less urgent than is usually the case in pressing it upon the gentlemen.
However, there is less drinking at this post than at any other I have
seen, as large as it is. Although, with few exceptions, all drink here,
it is done quietly at home and without excess.”

As our young friend had narrowly escaped with his life from drowning at
Annapolis, so did he from the pranks of an unruly horse at the Omaha
Barracks. He was about mounting the horse for a ride, when the animal
started on the run before he could get into the saddle, when he was
thrown forward upon his head. The trouble was owing to a defect in the
bridle. In accounting for his escape, he remarked that his thick head
was what saved his life. True to his native pluck, he tackled the same
horse a number of times afterward, until the animal—a special
favorite—was subdued.

In the month of June, 1875, it would seem as if something like
homesickness was weighing down his spirits, for he then began to write
about employment in civil life. Not that he disliked the army, but he
longed for some business that would enable him to make a little money.
He thought he could supply a sufficient amount of energy to prosecute a
commercial venture. He felt that there was a great difference between
the roads that lead to wealth and to military glory. If his father
should chance to see an opening that might give him a fortune in a few
days at the expense of a few hundred dollars or some hard work, he
wanted to be promptly notified. He broached these business ideas at that
time merely for the sake of having a subject for discussion when
permitted to visit his home.

The life at the Omaha garrison, during the summer of 1875, was
comfortable but monotonous. The faithfulness with which the young
officer corresponded with his parents is eminently characteristic of a
dutiful son. When not writing about his surroundings and daily duties,
or sketching the character of his associates, he ventured to discuss
business matters with his father, frequently volunteering a bit of
advice. He often alluded to the Annapolis farm and to people and events
connected with Georgetown, now a part of Washington City, where he
expected the family to remain permanently. On every subject discussed,
he manifested a clear head, and enlivened his more serious talk with an
occasional joke, for which he seemed to have a fondness. In expressing
his opinions on men and things, it seemed impossible for him to hesitate
or equivocate; he always went directly to the point, and, though
charitable, he could not refrain from looking out for the demands of
justice, as, for example, when alluding to the death of a man who had
been untrue to himself and friends, he said “to die was about the best
thing he could do.” As to his jokes, they were not confined to his
private letters, as will be shown by one of them practiced upon the post
trader during a dull period in the garrison. The trader in question, a
young fellow, had removed the balls from the pistol of one of his
clerks, with the intention of playing a ghostly trick upon him that
night. He told Lockwood and another friend of his intention, and they
determined to turn the tables upon the trader. They notified the clerk,
and at midnight the amateur ghost rose from his bed, enveloped himself
in a white sheet, and stole softly into the room of the _unsuspecting_
clerk. Just then an improvised noise was made outside the door, when the
clerk seemingly awoke with an exclamation of terror at seeing the ghost.
The report of the pistol was duly followed by the return of the ball
held in hand, _à la ghost_, but immediately after, the poor ghost found
himself completely drenched with a bucket of water, which had been
coolly set aside for that purpose. At this unexpected turn of affairs,
the trader fled in the greatest consternation, leaving his “trade-mark”
behind, and, as he passed out of the door, received a second pail of
water from one of his ghostly companions. The result was that it took a
long time for him to dry his saturated skin, and a much longer for his
title of Mr. Ghost to be lost by the garrison boys. Not long after the
above incident, this personage found that there was not “the ghost of a
chance” of his continuing in business, as he became insolvent and had to
retire. It would appear that while many of these military merchants on
the frontiers have a chance to make fortunes, those who are located near
a city like Omaha find it difficult to make both ends meet in their
business affairs.

On reading the proceedings of Congress during the winter of 1875, he
writes to his father as follows: “Congress seems to be looking around
for some scape-goat on which to pile the odium of the millions
legislated away, and, as usual, pitches on the army. It seems to be the
opinion here, however, that no reduction will take place this winter. If
Congressmen consulted occasionally others than the staff-officers living
in Washington with regard to military affairs, they might find out the
true whereabout of the tremendous rat-hole which swallows up annually
the sum of thirty-four millions of dollars. It does not go to support
the army proper, but to support that enormous, overgrown, expensive
adjunct of the army, the staff, which, created merely for the
administration of the _army_, now masters that which it was intended to
subserve, and has become superior to it in rank and influence, and in
everything that rank and influence can bring. But Congress seems to be
blind to the fact that expenditures are credited to the army, under the
army appropriation bill, which have no legitimate connection with it,
and which would still be required if no army existed. Why is it that the
army is the perpetual foot-ball of these demagogues? Is it thus, at
every session, to be bantered about by those who do not understand the
requirements of the country in this respect? Is not the causing of this
periodical uncertainty respecting his fate the most pernicious thing
that Congress can do to an officer? O consistency, thou art a jewel! How
is it that the navy and other branches of the public service are not
subject to this constant tinkering? But I am not in Congress, and had
better subside.” The assertions here made can not be controverted, and,
coming from a young man who had but recently passed his majority, prove
him to be the possessor of very substantial abilities. He also expressed
decided opinions in regard to various noted officials charged with
improper conduct in Washington at the time alluded to, all of which have
been sustained by subsequent developments.

Remembering what he said about the drinking customs of Omaha, on
New-Year’s-day, 1875, it is pleasant to have him record the fact, on the
2d of January, 1876, that “the most noticeable feature during the
previous day, in society, was the entire absence, at most houses, of any
intoxicating liquors, and that he did not see a case of drunkenness
during the entire day—a thing very rare even in the cities of the East.”
On a subsequent occasion, he mentions the fact that, when one of his
sergeants had been drinking to excess, he put him in arrest, but
released him the next day, after warning him of the consequences of a
repetition of the offense, and “preaching him a sermon on the evils of
intoxication, moral, mental, and physical.” On one occasion, when his
father had asked how he spent his leisure time in the barracks, he
replied that he read, so as to combine pleasure with profit, played on
his flute, and studied the art of short-hand, which had long been a
hobby with him, and was to be in the future an important accomplishment.
In an effort to read Draper’s “Intellectual Development of Europe,” he
could only manage about one half of the work, and to counteract its
dullness resorted to a novel, “The Wandering Jew.” As he was frequently
called upon to act as recorder of the military court, he found his
knowledge of stenography very useful and very much of a relaxation, and,
on receiving a letter from one of his sisters which was good but not
very plainly written, he said that he had been able to make it out by
means of his skill in shorthand writing. As to his studies, he had
formed a regular plan for prosecuting them, but was constantly
interrupted by extra official duties. Among other things, he devoted
himself to the German language, and subsequently to French, and attained
considerable proficiency. An idea of his habits of industry may be
gathered from what he wrote to his father, when the General was placed
on the retired list of the navy: “So you are retired this month. You
ought to open an office, or do something to occupy your mind. Every one
needs something in the way of business or duty. You will soon get tired
of reading continuously.” On the approach of spring, and with the
expectation of obtaining a leave of absence during the coming summer, he
resumed a discussion with his father about leaving the army for civil
employment. He had entered it well posted in regard to its
disadvantages, and chiefly for the sake of having something to do. He
had now become more deeply impressed than before that promotion was so
slow, that his prospects of increased rank and pay offered no
inducements to any young man of energy and industry, qualities which he
certainly possessed. He was not then ready for decisive action, but he
was determined to support himself, and would, therefore, be on the
lookout for advantageous prospects in some other line of employment. In
one of his letters, after commenting upon the school which two of his
sisters were attending, he gives us this bit of experience: “I am a
school-teacher myself; my pupils, the non-commissioned officers of the
company. They waste the midnight oil, however, only in _boning_ the
tactics. I go down and dilate and expatiate very profoundly on the
reasons and logic of this and that. This is a pleasant school to have;
the authority and influence of the officer have their full weight in the
ordinary school-room as elsewhere in the army.” In May, 1876, after
giving an account of a proposed demonstration, under General Crook,
against the Indians on the Yellowstone, he thus relieves his mind:
“Would that I belonged to the cavalry! I like motion, action, and
variety. To be sure, I would rather be here (in Omaha) than where the
other companies are, but still would rather be in the field than here.”
In June, 1876, the monotony of his life was relieved by an order to take
some convicts to the State prison near Fort Leavenworth, which he
described as the largest post in the country, containing the post
proper, the department headquarters, and the military prison. The State
prison is about six miles from the town. “Here,” he writes, “are sent
all the enlisted men who are dishonorably discharged, convicted of
theft, or other not purely military offenses. The inclosure is an
immense yard, surrounded by a high stone wall—the building, which is on
one side, having an appearance somewhat like the Smithsonian
Institution. In the inclosure are various other buildings, each one used
as a workshop for some trade, almost all the common trades being
represented. The prisoners, numbering about five hundred, are together
in the daytime, but not at night, and are not allowed to talk with each
other. It was from this prison that the best features of the new
military prison were obtained, the board of officers on the management
of the prison at Fort Leavenworth having decided it to be the best one
to imitate.”

In the autumn of 1876, when he was granted a leave of absence to visit
his parents, they found him in personal appearance wonderfully improved
and developed, the boy of 1873 having become a handsome and accomplished
gentleman. He was not slow, as may be supposed, in making his way to
Philadelphia to visit the Centennial Exposition, which he greatly
enjoyed.




                                  IV.
                          ARMY-LIFE IN KANSAS.


During Lieutenant Lockwood’s absence on leave, his regiment was
transferred to Fort Leavenworth, and there we find him early in 1877,
and for about two years thereafter. Of course, the garrison life of an
officer, in times of peace, is somewhat monotonous; but the letters
which the lieutenant wrote from this station contain some passages which
are interesting and illustrate his character, as will be seen in the
following pages. Here it should be stated that, during his sojourn at
Fort Leavenworth, he made many pleasant acquaintances, which ripened
into friendship; among them being the widow of an officer, with whom he
boarded for some time, and whose friendship he particularly valued.

At a time when there was quite a rage at the garrison for private
theatricals, one of the superior officers took the liberty, without
previous consultation, of putting Lockwood on the list of performers,
whereupon he declined the honor, as he thought Nature never intended him
for a star. In speaking of a little difficulty between two of his
friends, he manifests his love of fun by stating that one of them had
denied the allegation and defied the alligator. When commenting upon
some disagreeable March weather, he said, “I don’t think the ground-hog
has seen his shadow, and hence the latter part of the month ought to be
pleasant.” After a remark on the proficiency he was making in the study
of French, he quietly continues, “There are many here who speak it ‘_à
l’Américaine_,’ as if they thought that ‘the chief end of man.’”

As if never satisfied with his acquirements, he writes in one of his
letters as follows: “My latest hobby is telegraphing. The signal officer
of the department has loaned me a small battery and an instrument. We
have put up the wires and are progressing well. Telegraphy, like
phonography, is easy to transmit after some little practice; but it is
difficult to recognize the sounds as they come over the wire, and it
requires as much practice as it does to recognize the phonographic
characters. I have the instrument on the table before me, and can not
fail to gain some proficiency at any rate.”

In July, 1877, when the strikers and rioters were making trouble in St.
Louis, Mo., Lieutenant Lockwood’s company and five others were ordered
to that city on duty. After their arrival, they waited in daily
expectation of mowing down the mob, but there was little fighting, as
the police and militia were found to be amply sufficient to subdue all
disturbance. He was greatly pleased with the city and military quarters
of St. Louis, and felt that he would like to remain there on permanent
duty. The feature which pleased him more than any other at St. Louis was
a private garden of about fifty acres, exquisitely planned, and
containing the rarest and most beautiful flowers and trees. The floral
display, there, he thought superior to that at the Centennial
Exposition. The owner, a bachelor named Shaw, nearly eighty years of
age, and a man of enormous wealth, paid out yearly in expenses
twenty-five thousand dollars. At the garden residence of this
millionaire, young Lockwood and a friend were hospitably entertained—a
wonderful contrast to the accommodations at a beer-saloon, near the
arsenal gate, where the army officers were obliged to take their meals
while in the city. Altogether the trip was pleasant, but too expensive
for men with limited means. On their return to Fort Leavenworth from the
Eden-like garden of St. Louis, they were informed of Indian troubles in
Montana, and startled by a rumor that they must soon be off upon a hunt
for Indians—illustrating the vicissitudes of army-life.

It was about this time that a specimen of American royalty visited Fort
Leavenworth with his daughter, to whom young Lockwood had an opportunity
of being polite. This was a great cattle-man from Texas, who was said to
have fenced in a grazing-farm of a million of acres, and who numbered
his cattle by tens of thousands. His name was King, and his title in all
the West was the “Cattle King of Texas.” The father and daughter were
much interested in an inspection of the fort, where they were hospitably
entertained. From that time onward for several months, the dullness of
garrison-life was only relieved by parties, dinners, and theatrical
amusements in the city, by the presence of an encampment of Indians near
the post, and by attendance at a grand reception and ball given at
Kansas City by the Governor of the State. The letters written by young
Lockwood during all this period are elaborate and full of interest to
his parents, but not enlivened with any incidents of public interest.
The garrison courts seem to have demanded very much of his attention,
because of his skill in taking down testimony by short-hand, and he was
frequently compelled to devote many of his sleeping hours to the duty of
writing out his notes.

While going from the fort into town one day, he witnessed what he called
an awful spectacle—three little boys in a state of intoxication. This
recalled the fate of one of his former companions in the East, who had
become a drunkard, and in a letter to his father he recorded the
following: “Liquor is certainly a terrible curse; one constantly sees
illustrations of this in the army. You rather startled me in a recent
letter by telling me you had taken the pledge. Had you departed from
your abstemious habits in this respect? was my first thought, but I was
at once relieved by seeing that your allusion was to something else. A
rule that I have had for a long time and seldom depart from, is not to
drink before sunset and never to do so in a saloon. It is rather
superfluous in me to have any such rules, as it is very seldom that I
have a desire to touch spirituous drinks, and then I partake only for
the sake of not appearing to be rude in social matters.”

On one occasion, after describing a splendid dinner which he had
attended, he branches off upon his own experiences in that line, stating
that he had been caterer for the “Bachelors’ Club” during the current
month, and playing housekeeper for the first time in his life. He was
striving to feed the mess well and to reduce expenses, the individual
assessments amounting to twenty-four dollars.

“We have a good deal of fun,” he says, “at the mess; among other ways,
by a resolution of the officers that I shall keep a record of the puns,
jokes, profane expressions, etc. Any one indulging in these is put back
or set forward on a regular motion and vote by the members, and any one
getting a record of fifteen has to send to the store for a supply of
cigars. One of the mess, having the bad habit of saying, ‘O Lord!’ and
‘Damn it!’ when excited, gets a great many bad marks, and is made
unhappy. The standard of wit being very high, one seldom ‘goes ahead.’”

In May, 1878, when it was doubtful what Congress would do about reducing
the army, and Lieutenant Lockwood thought that he might decide to leave
the service, he discussed with his father the question of future
employment. He thought favorably of a position in some telegraph
company, thereby proving that, in all his studies and leisurely
occupations, he was practical, and no visionary. Another idea that he
had was that he might play Cincinnatus, and again go upon the farm. He
also thought of a position in connection with the Signal Service as one
that would suit him should he, from any cause, be compelled to leave the
army; and this suggestion, taken in connection with his subsequent
career, is notable. He went so far, indeed, as to ask his father about
the practicability of securing such a position in that corps, and
desired especially to know all about the necessary qualifications.

On one occasion, after alluding to the possibility of his being
transferred for duty to some other place, he says that it might be a
good thing for him, as he could not remain at Leavenworth always, and
yet he dreaded to be sent to some “far-distant and isolated post.” When
he wrote those words, how little did he imagine that he would eventually
close his earthly career in a land of supreme desolation within the
Arctic Circle!

Subsequently—July, 1878—he resumed with special earnestness the
consideration of being detailed for duty in the Signal Service, and,
with his father’s approbation, made the proper application. He thought
the proposed transfer would be of benefit to him in many ways, and if he
failed to make it so, he would very quickly be ordered back to his
regiment.

In September he was ordered to St. Louis for the purpose of conducting
some recruits westward, and for a short time it was uncertain whether he
would have to go to Texas or the Territory of Wyoming, whereby were
shown the uncertainties which attend life in the army. He took the
recruits to Fort Laramie, and, on his way, was in danger of being
embroiled with the Cheyenne Indians under Sitting Bull, but returned in
safety, by way of his old camp at Omaha, to his company at Fort
Leavenworth. During another trip, which he soon after took with his
company, he saw in western Kansas many Russian immigrants. They were
poor, and had settled at great distances along the streams to be near
water, not always easily found in these regions. They knew nothing of
the recent outbreak of the Indians, and, indeed, many of them had never
seen an Indian. The lieutenant also stumbled upon a colony of Swedes,
and at one place saw three women, whose husbands had been killed by the
Indians, and who were weeping bitterly in their distress. While his
company was on the march he generally kept at the head of the column,
thereby receiving the title of Pedestrian of the Command. Much of the
country over which they traveled was monotonous in the extreme—wide
stretches of prairie reaching to the far horizon. Antelopes and
Jack-rabbits were frequently seen, and sometimes were fired at without
success. But, to his mind, the most wonderful features about the country
were the countless tracks and bones of the buffalo, while not a living
animal was seen. One of his guides informed him that in former times he
had killed three hundred in a single day, so that it was no wonder that
they were now extinct.

In a letter to one of his sisters, in October, he speaks of his return
from this chase after Cheyenne Indians, and then goes on to mention some
amusing incidents that had occurred at the post, and gives her this bit
of artistic advice: “I hope you will profit by your talent for painting,
_not bury it in the ground, like the foolish steward_. Painting is a
great and very popular accomplishment; there is none perhaps more so.”
No matter what happened in or about the garrison, he seemed always ready
with his common-sense opinions referring to passing events. For example,
after alluding to the burning of a stable, with thirteen mules, when
some of them that had been released ran into the fire from fright, he
thus proceeds: “I was talking ‘over the wire’ with one of the men on our
telegraph line, and what he said is no doubt true, and shows the
short-sightedness of the Government. He said that he and many of the
other soldiers had damaged or lost their clothes, and that if soldiers
were reimbursed for their losses on such occasions, they would work with
much more _vim_ and energy, and that he heard one man say that he would
not lose his new pantaloons for all the mules in the stable. Of course,
in the case of a private house on fire, I believe the enlisted men would
risk everything; but in cases of this kind, where Government property
only is concerned, this feeling has its existence. There is, too, some
reason for this feeling; for, no matter how hard a soldier or officer
may work at a fire to save public property, the Government will not
reward him even by the restitution of his clothes. Nothing short of an
act of Congress would be authority for such an issue.”

That the heart of this young man was as pure as his mind was bright, may
be seen by reading the following remarks concerning the death of a
little niece: “I learn with deep regret the death of poor little Agnes,
and sympathize heartily with Lidie and her husband in their affliction,
the depth of which none but a parent can know. It should be a
consolation, however, that the disease carried the little one away in
all the innocence of childhood, before her mother’s love had been
intensified with years, and her own intelligence had taught her to love
and cling to life. The sad news reached me on the day of the funeral of
the little daughter of a brother lieutenant. The little baby seemed very
amiable in life, and after death lost none of her sweetness. I sat up
with the remains during the night before the funeral.” Alas! when this
noble-hearted young man gave up his own life, his only night-watchers
were the stars and the icy mountains of the far-distant North!

In December, 1878, the Twenty-third Regiment received orders for service
in the Indian Territory, and a few weeks afterward entered upon its line
of march. In the mean time, the lieutenant made himself useful in
performing the duties of an engineer for the sanitary benefit of the
Leavenworth garrison. After some appropriate studying, he soon got the
knack of running the levels and measuring angles with the theodolite. He
found these new duties interesting, preferring the field-work to the
making of the necessary profiles and other drawings, involving
measurements to the ¹/₁₀₀₀ of an inch—rather a confining employment.




                                   V.
              ARMY-LIFE IN INDIAN TERRITORY AND COLORADO.


From the spring of 1879 until the winter of 1881, Lieutenant Lockwood
spent a part of his time in the Indian Territory, but chiefly in the
State of Colorado. The first duty of his company was to establish a
cantonment on the Canadian River. On their way thither, they made a halt
at Fort Supply, where the country was sparsely settled, and where the
rolling prairies seemed desolate and interminable. Those of his regiment
who had been ordered to Supply, he found in miserable quarters—log-huts
covered inside with canvas—old, cold, and forlorn in appearance inside
and out, and yet the canvas walls thus used and useless were furnished
at a cost of hundreds of dollars. After leaving that place for the
Canadian River, he was made the engineer officer, and, with a view of
making a map of the route and surrounding country, devoted his time to
the science of topography, being rewarded by the hearty approbation of
the officer in command.

He had counted upon having some good hunting on this route for turkeys
and other game, but was disappointed, owing to the fact, as was
supposed, that several hundred Indians had passed through the country
some weeks before and had gobbled up everything, including a host of
_gobblers_. On reaching their destination, the company went into camp
under a bluff on the Canadian River, where they were to remain until
buildings could be erected in the immediate vicinity. At the conclusion
of his first letter written home from this camp, he says, “I am lying at
full length on a buffalo-robe with my paper on ‘Daniel Deronda,’ and the
position is not comfortable.”

In June, Lieutenant Lockwood was sent with a small party to Post Reno,
where troubles were apprehended with the Indians. It was not necessary
to do any fighting there, however, for the reason that the chief
inhabitants of the region were rattlesnakes, tarantulas, and
prairie-dogs, and the Indians in the vicinity did not seem to be in a
blood-thirsty mood. Returning to the cantonment on the Canadian River,
he was depressed by the discomforts of the place—no society and many
extra duties—but he, nevertheless, found time and inclination to study
the Spanish language, as if determined not to leave a stone unturned in
his efforts to make himself useful, or ready for any emergency. After
confessing his fondness for social intercourse, he writes: “At times I
get the _ennui_ and _blues_ very much. Still I try to preserve a
philosophic mind, and when the dark side of the picture presents itself,
I take a different stand-point, and thus force myself to see, by
contrast, the bright side. I find, and ever have found, that the more
occupied I am, the better contented I feel.”

In April, 1880, he went upon a kind of exploring expedition, riding in
ten days a distance of nearly three hundred miles, and on returning was
glad enough to have a little rest in his camp. But, before he could fall
into any idle habits, he was ordered westward, with his command, on
still more arduous duties. In a letter from a camp near Saguache, on the
borders of Colorado, he sent home the following account of what he had
seen and experienced: “We left Fort Garland on the 17th of May, and have
since been traveling across ‘San Luis Park,’ the ‘Valley of the Gods.’
This is a vast level plain in southern Colorado, surrounded on all sides
by high, snow-capped mountains, which always seem within a few hours’
travel, and yet are miles and miles away. When one considers that Blanco
Peak is over fourteen thousand feet above the sea-level, one does not
wonder that it is very plainly seen from where I am now writing. This
Paradise of the Gods is some two hundred miles long by over sixty
across, and is a veritable desert. I have met nothing like it outside of
Arizona. The vegetation consists of greasewood and sage-brush—sometimes
not even this; the irrigation-ditches that one meets near the few
streams seem hardly able to produce a feeble, stunted grass. For miles
and miles, all is pulverized dust, which, blown by the winds in blinding
clouds, covers everything like the ashes of a volcano. Night before last
one of these _pleasant_ zephyrs blew down several of the tents, and
filled the air so thickly with dust, that several of the command, who
had their hats blown off, were unable to find or recover them. They say
it sometimes rains here, but I very much doubt it. The few ranches we
have encountered are on streams descending from the mountains, which
sink in the plain after running a short distance; and bordering them are
the squalid adobe houses, the only habitations in the country.

“Improbable as it may seem, the owners say that they raise potatoes,
etc. Surely these mountains should be of gold and silver to compensate
for the sterility of the soil.” The prospect did not make Lockwood
hilarious, and he frankly said that he was tired of army-life, and that
eating almost nothing but bacon, and going without any comforts caused
him to sigh for a return to the old Annapolis farm. He had not the
ambition to enjoy the glory of army-life in such a wilderness. It might,
indeed, give one a competency, but it was a gold-mine in Arizona that
had recently given a fortune of fifty thousand dollars to one of the
officers of his regiment. After a short stay at Garland and Alamosa, and
catching a glimpse of the Del Norte, the command reached the Cochetapa
Pass, near Los Pinos and the summit of the Rocky Mountains; and now the
lieutenant began to experience a kind of mountain-fever, which he called
a weird condition of the system. He was troubled with the shortness of
breath usual at great altitudes. The six hundred mules drawing the train
of one hundred wagons had great difficulty in passing through what he
called the terrible cañons. Early in June, 1880, he reached the
Uncompahgre River, where the command encamped. Hardly had he obtained
any relaxation before an order came from Fort Leavenworth, detailing a
general court and making him the judge advocate, thereby proving that
there was not much rest for an officer of recognized ability. While
anxious to make money, he did not, while among the mountains, follow the
example of certain fellow-officers, who devoted some attention to mining
speculations, their mode of operating being as follows: “For example,
they secure the services of a competent man, provide him with food,
etc., and send him out to prospect. Those in the Nineteenth have
received a very flattering letter from their man, who has struck a very
rich vein, _according to his account_. But this and all similar ventures
are mere chance. Money, to the amount of twenty-five or fifty dollars,
seems little to invest in enterprises that may pay thousands; but these
investments count up and are not pleasant to consider when all ends in
failure. One of the officers has invested not less than thirty-three
hundred dollars in this mine-hunting business. He goes it alone, and has
all the enthusiasm of an old miner.” Not caring to waste his money in
speculations of this sort, he improved his leisure in exploring the
scenery of the region, especially some cañons where the walls were
several thousand feet high, and also a stream called Cow Creek, where he
had some superb fishing and caught the largest trout he had ever seen,
while his companions killed a number of deer. Among the scenes in which
he was especially interested was a hot spring which measured thirty feet
across, a waterfall two hundred feet high, and a small mining hamlet
nestled in a pocket of the mountains, and where, funny to relate, he and
his companions were suspected to be tramps or horse-thieves. Returning
to his regular cantonment on the Uncompahgre, he was informed of a
pending trouble with the Ute Indians, when, according to his habit, he
expressed this decided opinion: “If the sentimentalists on Indian
questions in the East could be brought out here and made to feel and
suffer the outrages which these savages inflict on isolated settlers,
there would not be so many to support the Interior Department in its
abominable prejudice in all questions of Whites _vs._ Indians.”

In one of his letters, written from a cantonment in Colorado, he
mentions with pain the temporary fall of one of his brother officers,
who, while playing a game of poker, was charged with dishonesty, thereby
pocketing a hundred dollars. The poor fellow had been placed in arrest
and was to have a trial. In speaking of his manner of killing time in
his Colorado camp, he alludes to the fact of having two setter dogs,
which he was training for use and his own amusement, and further says
that when not playing a game of billiards at the store near the camp, he
spent his time in reading, the books then occupying his attention being,
Tyler’s “Baconian Philosophy,” which he greatly admired; Swinton’s
“History of the Rebellion,” which he criticised with some severity; and
Green’s “Russian Campaign in Turkey,” which interested him greatly.




                                  VI.
                   PREPARING FOR THE ARCTIC REGIONS.


From this point, the story of Lieutenant Lockwood’s life will be chiefly
given from the records which he kept during his sojourn in the Arctic
regions. For reasons which the general reader will appreciate, all
merely technical and official remarks have been omitted, and only those
retained which are calculated to illustrate the personal character of
the man and officer, it being understood that his journals, illustrating
his merits and labors, will be fully set forth in the official history,
to be hereafter published, of the expedition with which he was so
honorably identified.

In 1880 it was proposed by an International Polar Commission, for the
purpose of elucidating in behalf of science the phenomena of the weather
and of the magnetic needle, that meteorological stations should be
established by various countries in different parts of the polar
regions. The Congress of the United States made an appropriation for
establishing a scientific colony at the two places designated for the
occupation of the Americans—viz., Point Barrow, in Alaska, and Lady
Franklin Bay, in Grinnell Land. These stations were to be occupied for
from one to three years. At the time the expedition was being organized
in Washington for the latter place, Lieutenant Lockwood was on a visit
to his parents in that city. Taking a special interest in the operations
of the Signal-Service Bureau, which had the business in charge, he
forthwith volunteered for the proposed expedition, and his services were
accepted by the Secretary of War. When the party for the Lady Franklin
Bay station was fully organized, it consisted of First-Lieutenant
Adolphus W. Greely, U. S. A., commander; Lieutenants F. F. Kislingbury
and James B. Lockwood, U. S. A., as assistants; and Dr. O. Pavy, as
surgeon and naturalist; with a force of twenty-two sergeants, corporals,
and privates, all connected with the army, and whose names are given as
follows: Edward Israel, Winfield S. Jewell, George W. Rice, David O.
Ralston, Hampden S. Gardiner, sergeants in the Signal Corps; William H.
Cross, sergeant in the general service; David L. Brainard and David
Linn, sergeants of cavalry; Nicholas Saler, corporal of infantry; Joseph
Ellison, corporal of infantry; Charles B. Henry, Maurice Connell, Jacob
Bender, Francis Long, William Whistler, Henry Biederbick, Julius R.
Fredericks, William A. Ellis, and Roderick R. Schneider, privates in
various branches of the army; and, finally, two Esquimaux, Jans Edwards
and Frederick Christiansen, of Greenland.

In view of the possibility that Lady Franklin Bay might become a
permanent station, all the preliminary arrangements were made as
complete as possible. A steamer called the Proteus was secured for
conveying the expedition to Lady Franklin Bay, and she was ordered to
await the arrival of the explorers at the port of St. John’s, in
Newfoundland. Lieutenant Lockwood sailed in a steamer from Baltimore
with the party and reached St. John’s late in June.

Here it may not be out of place to submit a few remarks on the utility
of these Arctic explorations, which are sometimes criticised by people
who, without due consideration, jump to hasty conclusions. In former
times their main object was to find open passages between the northern
regions of Europe, Asia, and America, and to settle the problem of the
north pole; and statistics show that when these expeditions have
confined their operations within reasonable limits, the mortality
attending them has been remarkably small—less than in ordinary
commercial voyages. Sir John Franklin went far beyond these limits, and
left no monuments by which he could be traced. De Long put his ship into
the polar ice with the design of moving with the polar drift. The Greely
Expedition was expected to be confined, and was confined, to the
well-known waters of Smith’s Sound. It could, therefore, be reached at
any time, and, if necessary, it could fall back upon a point accessible
at all times. All that was required to secure its safe return was _a
well-chosen base, and an absolute certainty that this base would be
maintained_. Unfortunately, neither requirement was fulfilled, and hence
nineteen men lost their lives. Sledge-journeys from established bases,
though fraught with great labor and discomfort, have never been attended
with serious loss of life. It is now about one thousand years since the
first Arctic voyage was made, and their aggregate usefulness can hardly
be questioned when we remember that they have developed fisheries that
have built up the commerce and navies of nations, and that the direct
return into the exchange of England has been far more than the cost to
her of all her Arctic explorations. The Polar Commission, already
alluded to, inaugurated a new policy in regard to Arctic explorations,
and one whose utility can not be questioned. It had its origin, in 1875,
in the mind of a German discoverer named Carl Weyprecht; and in the
opinion of many of the leading minds of the world, the meteorological
observations inaugurated by him have done much, and will do much more,
to rectify errors in the polar problem and bring to light information
about the ice zones, which will give the observers a prominent position
in scientific history. According to Professor Joseph Henry, the problems
connected with physical geography and science, which are yet unsolved,
are the determination of the figure and of the magnetism of the earth,
complete knowledge of the tides of the ocean, the winds of the globe,
and the influence of extreme cold on animal and vegetable life. Surely
the men who voluntarily toil and suffer in their efforts to obtain the
needed light on all these subjects, are quite as worthily employed as
those who struggle for riches or political fame. In the Professor’s
opinion, all the branches of science above mentioned are indirectly
connected with the well-being of man, and tend not only to enlarge his
sphere of mental activity, but to promote the application of science to
the arts of life. A French writer, after applauding the plans of the
Polar Commission, concludes his remarks as follows: “The larger number
of the civilized nations are striving by scientific means to wrest the
mysterious secrets of the deep from the hidden recesses of the North.”
In 1884 the number of nations that had entered heartily into the project
was thirteen; fifteen polar stations, and over forty auxiliary stations,
had already been established. That the reader may fully understand the
operations and exploits which are to be chronicled in the subsequent
pages of this volume, it may be well to submit the subjoined extract
from the official report of General W. B. Hazen, Chief of the United
States Signal Service, for the year 1881: “Owing to the very mobile
nature of the atmosphere, the changes taking place on one portion of the
globe, especially in the Arctic zone, quickly affect regions very
distant therefrom. The study of the weather in Europe and America can
not be successfully prosecuted without a daily map of the whole northern
hemisphere, and the great blank space of the Arctic region upon our
simultaneous international chart has long been a subject of regret to
meteorologists. The general object is to accomplish, by observations
made in concert at numerous stations, such additions to our knowledge as
can not be acquired by isolated or desultory traveling parties. No
special attempt will be made at geographical exploration, and neither
expedition is in any sense expected to reach the north pole. The single
object is to elucidate the phenomena of the weather and of the magnetic
needle as they occur in America and Europe, by means of observations
taken in the region where the most remarkable disturbances seem to have
their origin.”

While the foregoing were to be considered as the primary considerations,
it was expressly stated in the official instructions, that sledging
parties, generally, should work in the interests of exploration and
discovery, and should be conducted with all possible care and fidelity.
Careful attention was also to be given to the collection of specimens of
the animal, mineral, and vegetable kingdoms. It will be seen that all
that was accomplished by Lieutenant Lockwood was instigated by the
mandate connected with the use of the sledge.

It thus appears that the Greely expedition was not only intended to
accomplish a good work, but that in all human probability the same might
have been accomplished without serious loss of life. That there was a
deplorable loss of life, we can only lament, leaving for others to point
out the causes of the disaster which befell the expedition.




                                  VII.
                FROM NEWFOUNDLAND TO LADY FRANKLIN BAY.


All things being ready, the Greely Expedition left St. John’s,
Newfoundland, for Lady Franklin Bay, on Thursday, July 7, 1881, in the
steamer Proteus, Captain Pike. She was a barkentine, measuring two
hundred and fifty feet in length, and having a burden of six hundred
tons. Built in Scotland for the whaling and sealing service, she had
already made several successful voyages within the Arctic Circle and on
the Labrador coast. The departure of the ship elicited no demonstration
from the people on the dock, excepting a few cheers from some
warm-hearted fishermen. Whether the good people of Newfoundland were
disgusted because they could not sell any more supplies at extravagant
prices, or were displeased with the Yankee explorers for presuming to
compete with Englishmen in the icy North, are questions not to be easily
solved.

During his stay in St. John’s, Lieutenant Lockwood wrote a letter to his
mother, in which he gave the following account of the city:

“St. John’s is a queer and forlorn old place; everything is antiquated,
slow, and behind the times in every respect. The few hotels are more
like third-class boarding-houses; a livery-stable is not to be found in
this city of thirty thousand. This condition of affairs is said to be
due to the religion of the place, which is Roman Catholic. It is charged
that ignorance and poverty are what this church most thrives on, and it
is certainly a thriving church here. The other day the shops were all
closed, and the place assumed the appearance of Sunday—it was a holy day
for their patron saints, Peter and Paul. Only two classes here—the poor
and the rich—and everything accords with the former class. Crooked
streets and mean, forlorn, dirty houses everywhere. The only respectable
public buildings are the Catholic churches and the convents.”

With the wind favorable, the sea calm, the sky clear, and all in good
spirits, away went the vessel on her voyage to the North. A
steam-launch, called the Lady Greely, rested securely on the main deck.
It was arranged that the sergeants of the expedition should sleep in the
cabin, eating at the second table, and the rest of the men live forward;
and, though somewhat crowded, it was hoped they would all be
comfortable. During the first twenty-four hours, two hundred miles were
made. Lieutenant Greely and most of the men were sea-sick. At sunset on
the second day out, the first iceberg was seen, and attracted the
special attention of the land-lubbers. On the 9th, gales from the
northwest set in, and the sick men became worse—the thermometer marking
forty degrees, the air being damp and uncomfortable. The wind moderated
in the evening, but left the sea very rough, so that the steam-launch
had to be secured in her cradle by braces. Although then in the track of
the St. Lawrence trade, not a single vessel was seen, suggesting the
idea that business was not flourishing. As to Lieutenant Lockwood, he
was in good spirits, and amused himself by reading Kennan’s interesting
book on Siberian life. On the following day the sea went down, and the
sick men came up from their berths and were able to resume their places
at the table, Lockwood and Kislingbury being the only ones who had
escaped sea-sickness. When the former had finished Kennan’s book, he
took up Barrow’s “Voyage within the Arctic Circle,” reading it in the
presence of several icebergs, which appeared as if they intended to
welcome the band of Yankee adventurers to their inhospitable domain.

On the morning of the 11th, notwithstanding the promise of fine summer
weather, the sky became overcast, and at noon the captain, assisted by
the volunteers, including Lockwood, Israel, and Gardiner, could hardly
succeed in getting observations, and though they reckoned the latitude
at 58°, it was not reliable. Rain, attended with high winds or gales,
succeeded, the sufferers from sea-sickness finding refuge in their
berths. Ellis, one of the sergeants, suffered more than the others,
having refused all food since leaving port. They could give him no aid
save a little wine and beef-tea. The cold, cheerless weather depressed
the spirits of all, but they hoped to get used to it. The days were
sensibly growing longer, beginning at 1.45 A. M. and closing at 10 P. M.
They now remarked the absence of icebergs and ice-floes, and wondered
whether this meant that the previous winter in the north had been so
mild that but little ice had formed, or that the spring had been so
backward that but little had become detached and drifted southward. They
had learned at St. John’s that the late winter had been the mildest ever
known there. At the close of the 11th, no land was in sight, and they
had made seven hundred miles. The steward informed Lockwood that the men
were growling about their food, which was the same as that received in
the cabin. He thought this a bad sign for Arctic explorers, but tried to
make matters more satisfactory.

The next day was disagreeable, a cold rain falling; and though a strong
head-wind was blowing, the sea was smooth, betokening land or ice, it
was supposed. Accordingly, at 9 P. M., they were aroused by the cry of
“ice ahead,” and, sure enough, there was seen, extending over 90° of the
horizon, the white line indicating an ice-floe. Coming up to the ice,
they found it to consist of detached pieces flowing southward. Some of
these assumed the most fantastic shapes—dogs, seals, and other animals,
and even houses and castles, readily presenting themselves to the
imagination. One piece looked like an old ruin. The pillars, dome, and
vaulted roof, all were there; indeed, the effect was perfect. Again,
other pieces presented varieties of color most beautiful and remarkable.
Generally, the lower parts being dark blue, were surmounted by a stratum
of pure white, resembling snow, but really the purest ice. They were two
hours in getting through this floe. Although daylight was continuous,
they could not, because of fogs, distinguish the hours of sunrise or
sunset.

On the following day the weather was still cloudy, and another ice-floe
detained them two hours. They also saw many isolated pieces and large
icebergs in the distance. This ice, it was said, came from the east
coast of Greenland with a current which, flowing around Cape Farewell,
passes up the west coast half way to Disco. It still proved interesting
to the voyagers by reason of its fantastic shapes and diversified
colors—white, blue, and green. It rose a few feet above the water-line,
and the submerged portion of the floe colored the water a most beautiful
green. Seals were then seen for the first time, basking in the sun on
the ice. Judging from the increased seas, they expected no more
ice-floes in front. The temperature also indicated this, for it was
sensibly warmer. Lockwood, who seemed never to be idle, now finished
Barrow and took up Captain Nares’s “British Expedition of 1875-’76,”
reading, writing, and Bowditch occupying much of his time. The crow’s
nest was hoisted to the main-top on that day. This was a large barrel or
hogshead with peep-holes on the side and a trap beneath. This afforded
shelter for a man posted there who looked out for the ice and the best
way of getting through it.

On the 16th, fogs detained them and interfered with noon observations,
but, lifting at three o’clock, they sighted the Greenland coast on the
starboard bow, distant fifteen miles. The coast-line appeared
exceedingly rugged and broken, and the interior, mountainous with deep
ravines running very abruptly down to the sea. The mountain-tops were
covered with snow, but generally the sides were bare of snow except the
ravines, which seemed to be filled up entirely. This range of mountains
reminded Lockwood of the Uncompahgre chain in Colorado as seen from Los
Pinos Valley. They saw the usual number of gulls and a species of duck
called the sea-pigeon, also several whales blowing and spouting in the
distance, surrounded by flocks of small birds which seemed to feed on
their offal. Kislingbury and the steward tried rifles on these whales,
but without success. One whale being near by, with apparent design to
cross the track of the vessel, was met by the rifle-ball, but with no
other effect than to cause him to throw up his tail and dive below the
surface. The thermometer rose to 50° on that day, rendering the deck,
where all were assembled to view the prospect, quite comfortable. They
then first witnessed the sunset since leaving St. John’s, because of the
fogs and clouds that had constantly attended the voyage. The sun’s disk
seemed greatly flattened just as it disappeared at 10.20, and presented
much the appearance of a huge mushroom seen edgewise. Enough of twilight
remained at midnight to render the horizon visible.

On the 16th, they steamed cautiously through the fog, making but
fourteen knots between noon and 6 P. M. Then the high, bold bluffs
forming the southern coast of Disco Island loomed up in the distance
directly ahead. These bluffs are almost vertical and probably five
hundred feet high, and are desolate and barren in the extreme. Their
continuity is interrupted only by deep ravines, or cañons, which break
through at various angles to the sea. They there found themselves in the
midst of a hundred icebergs of every conceivable form and size, and in
color of the purest white, resembling in the distance huge mountains of
chalk. One of the sights that attracted special notice consisted of two
bergs connected by an immense arch high enough overhead for the ship to
sail beneath, reminding Lockwood of the Natural Bridge of Virginia. On
near approach it looked like marble and was quite as smooth. Some time
afterward, and when two miles away, a signal-gun was fired for a pilot.
This was followed by a rumbling noise, which caused the voyagers to look
back, when they were surprised to see this immense arch tumble over and
fall into the sea, throwing the spray a hundred feet into the air and
producing a commotion of the sea sensible two miles away, and soon after
followed by a noise like distant thunder. Most truly sublime were both
spectacle and catastrophe! Icebergs are regarded as very dangerous both
by the Esquimaux and by experienced Arctic travelers, and are given a
wide berth.

[Illustration: Lockwood, Natives, and Kyack at Disco, Greenland.]

Moving on at a low speed, the steamer was finally boarded by a white man
attended by an Esquimaux, the former introducing himself as Mr.
Gleichen, the Governor of Godhaven, Lively, or Disco, as the capital is
variously called. The vessel was soon twisted through the narrow opening
behind which the town lies, and the voyagers found themselves in the
snuggest and smallest harbor, for its depth of water, that any of the
party had ever seen. On one side were the high cliffs, barren and
rugged, and on the other the few habitations which constituted the
place, the only dwellings presenting an appearance of anything more than
squalid huts being those of the governor and of the inspector, a Mr.
Smith. Besides the dwellings, there were several warehouses and a
church, all of wood. The huts of the natives were to some extent of
wood, but strengthened and made warm by thick walls of sod reaching to
the eaves.

Greely, Kislingbury, and Lockwood immediately went ashore to visit the
inspector, whose house stood near the water and presented a neat
appearance. Within they found quite an air of comfort and refinement. A
piano, a small billiard-table, a well-filled book-case, carpets,
pictures, and many other evidences of civilization and even elegance
were there. They found the wife of the inspector very pleasant and
speaking English fluently, while her daughter and a governess, though
speaking English with difficulty, were well dressed and ladylike. After
taking wine with these hospitable ladies, the lieutenants left their
commander to continue the conversation and wandered forth to view the
town. Passing without mishap several cross-looking Esquimaux dogs, they
found themselves in what seemed a carpenter’s shop, on the large, bare
floor of which a dance was in progress. After playing spectators for
some time they indulged in a waltz with the prettiest girls in the room,
and were surprised and pleased to find how well they got along together.
Their round dances were found to be like many figures of the “German” as
danced in the United States. Kislingbury gave the natives an exhibition
of the Indian dance, and thus became a favorite with them.

The dress of the men consisted of a pair of sealskin pantaloons and a
woolen or checked shirt. That of the women was very peculiar—indeed,
unique. One of the girls, whose dress may be taken to illustrate all,
wore a pair of seal-skin pantalets bound at the hips by a red scarf and
terminating just above the knees, where they met the white canvas tops
of a pair of boots, or rather leggings. These reached to the calf, and
there met the tops of red seal-skin bootlets, into which they were
inserted. These leggings were starched and prettily fringed at the top,
and their color indicated the state as to matrimony of the wearer, white
being reserved for maidens, and colors for those that were married. This
distinction was afterward found to be general. The pantalets were plain,
except some red leather pieces sewed on in front by way of ornament. The
upper garment consisted of a pretty, fancy-colored cassock, or jacket,
extending barely to the hips, replaced in cold weather by the same of
seal-skin with a hood. The upper part of the jacket was concealed by a
necklace, or rather by several necklaces, sewed together flat, which
formed a collar covering the bosom and shoulders. The head was covered
by a kind of chaplet formed of fancy-colored cloth, and the hair was
done up in a queue, which extended upward and backward from the top of
the head, and was tied with colored ribbon. The wrists and neck were
encircled with boas of dark-colored furs, which contrasted well with the
bright-colored skin. The arms were bare to the short sleeves of the
jacket, and on the fingers were a number of rings. So much for the Disco
belles!

The dancing officers did not reach their ship until after midnight, and
soon after the sun rose, flooding all nature with his glorious light,
and seemingly affecting natives and strangers alike, for both were seen
standing around to admire and enjoy the benediction of nature.

Inspector Smith visited the steamer, dressed in a military coat with
brass buttons, and military cap with wide gold-lace band, but wearing
seal-skin trousers. The strangers soon found themselves surrounded by a
fleet of Esquimaux boats, called _kyacks_, resembling in form a cigar
cut in half lengthwise and turned up at both ends. The framework of wood
was covered with seal-skin with the hair removed. In the center was a
hole into which the occupant inserted the lower part of his body to the
hips, drawing up at the same time a cylindrical piece of seal-skin which
was attached to the rim of the hole. When the top of this is gathered up
and secured over his chest, the man and boat are practically one, and
both are water-proof under all circumstances. The upper surface of the
kyack is but an inch or two above the water when smooth, and when rough,
of course it is frequently submerged entirely. In this craft the kyacker
braves the billows of the open sea, and, provided with lance and harpoon
to slay his game, and bladder and rope to mark its flight when struck
and buoy up its body when killed, he attacks the seal, walrus, or even
the narwhal. In South Greenland, where there is more open water, the
kyackers become very expert, and, by means of their short, two-bladed
paddles, can easily right themselves when upset, or even perform a
complete revolution without changing position or posture.

On Sunday, the 17th, Lieutenant Lockwood called on the governor, and
then went into many of the houses of the place; he found the natives
polite and hospitable, living in clean, well-built huts, whose interior
presented nothing peculiar except that about one third of the floor was
raised a few feet, constituting a platform, which was used as the
sleeping-couch of the whole family by night, and by day as a place of
deposit for articles in daily use. The walls were adorned with rough
prints or illustrations from European and American papers. In one house
was seen a translation of the Psalms into Esquimaux. Their words are run
together, as in the German language. Lockwood made some purchases,
giving in return an old pair of pantaloons, old clothes being a
circulating medium, and preferred to money. He was surprised to find
that these people had a paper currency, the units being the ocre and the
crown, one hundred ocres making one crown, while the crown is worth
about an English shilling. In dealing with one another, the ocre seems
to go a good way, but not so when a stranger is dealt with; and to do
much shopping with this currency, one must carry a load of paper equal
to what was required of Confederate currency in wartimes to buy a barrel
of flour. The coins were of copper, valued each at five ocres.

On the following day, Lieutenants Greely, Kislingbury, and Lockwood, all
dined at four o’clock with the inspector’s family, by invitation of his
wife, in the absence of her husband on official duty; the courses being
soup, fish, eider-duck, and canned green peas, with a dessert of jelly;
wines and brandy being served with the courses. The cooking and serving
were excellent, the waitress an Esquimaux damsel in pantalets.
Afterward, with others, they called on the governor, and with him went
down to witness a dance. Lockwood learned that the population of the two
divisions of North and South Greenland together was about nine thousand
souls.

On the 19th, at the request of Lieutenant Greely, Lockwood made an
exploration of the mountain-cliffs south of the town. After a long tramp
over the soggy moss, and up steep cliffs, much annoyed by innumerable
mosquitoes, he returned to dinner, with very little information worthy
of mention. After superintending some stowage, he again called to see
Mrs. Smith, the inspector’s wife, and enjoyed her excellent piano-music,
to say nothing of the wine and cigars she offered. Then he went to the
dance, but not until after the men had left. These Greenland dances, as
already intimated, resemble the Virginia reel, differing only in the
alternate chasing of the partners through the two rows till caught.

Having completed their stowage and coaling, and having taken on board
fourteen dogs with their food, they would have left Disco but for the
fogs. Dr. Pavy, who had been left there by Howgate, joined the party on
the 20th, as surgeon, as Mr. Clay was expected to do at Ritenbank. They
had some music on the chapel organ in the evening, which was well
rendered.

The penning of the dogs was a scene of excitement and amusement. Their
snarling and biting and fighting had no end until one of the number
present was acknowledged, for his prowess and valor, the victor by all
the others. Then the battle ceased, but only until there was a new
arrival, when the battle was renewed and the _parvenu_ put _hors de
combat_, or declared king. In due time the steamer left Disco, and
arrived at Ritenbank between 10 and 12 A. M. The harbor was found to be
quite roomy and the entrance wide and deep; icebergs float into it, and
thus render Ritenbank less desirable as a harbor than Disco. While
there, with Mr. Clay (who now joined the expedition) and some of the
men, Lockwood visited the neighboring bird mountains or looneries,
rowing up a fiord some three miles distant. The approach to these was
manifested by the commotion among the innumerable eider-ducks and other
wild fowl flying overhead, swimming in the water around, or occupying
the narrow ledges of the vertical cliffs on either side, some of which
were five hundred feet high and covered with birds. The shot used being
too small, would kill only at short range, and it was difficult to
obtain the game; consequently they got only seventy fowls of various
kinds. On their return they visited an Innuit burying-ground, which,
from its antiquity, must contain many of the natives, whose blood is
much purer than that of the present stock; for it is said the present
Esquimaux blood is now very much mixed. The graves were oblong piles of
lichen-covered stones, containing the moldering skeletons, which were
generally in a sitting posture. But little regard is paid to the dead in
Greenland. Influenza, and consumption induced thereby, are rapidly
carrying off the natives, and this is increased by uncleanly habits,
improper food, and bad ventilation, the latter aggravated by the
introduction of small stoves into their close houses. The present
longevity, it is said, averages thirty-three years.

The prevailing fogs greatly decreased the pleasure the explorers would
have had in viewing the grand scenery in the passage to Upernavik, which
they reached on the 23d of July, or in about fifteen days from
Newfoundland. They had in sight numbers of icebergs, some of immense
size. The whole western coast of Greenland is skirted with islands,
separated from each other and the mainland by deep fiords. If it were
not for the fogs, a pleasant summer excursion could be made through
these fiords to the everlasting barrier of glaciers, which render the
interior a veritable land of desolation.

Very soon after the expedition had arrived at Upernavik, it was found
necessary for some one to go to a place called Proven, to obtain
Esquimaux guides and a supply of Arctic clothing, and to Lieutenant
Lockwood was assigned this duty. He and his helpers boarded the
steam-launch, and, with Governor Elburg as guide, proceeded on their way
through an inner passage leading to the place of destination. Their
course lay along rocky and precipitous cliffs, many of them covered with
auks and other wild fowl. The cliffs attained an elevation of two and
three thousand feet, and were so smooth and regular as to have the
appearance of having been made by man. Without any shore whatever, large
ships could lie alongside in safety. On their arrival at Proven, they
saw the whole population in their picturesque costumes lining the shore,
to view what they had never seen before—a craft moving without oars or
sails.

Near the shore were located four large warehouses where seal-oil was
deposited before shipment, and where also were kept by the Danish
Government supplies of provisions for issue to the natives in case of
emergency. The huts of the natives were found still more primitive than
those at Disco, for here the entrance was through a long, low gallery,
requiring one to grope in darkness almost on hands and knees. Lockwood
softened the heart of the occupant of one by presents of tobacco, and
induced him to play on his fiddle simple airs which he had picked up
from whaling-crews. This brought in all the damsels of the town, and
soon waltzes and other dances prevailed. The lieutenant did not consider
it beneath his dignity to “show a heel.” He unfortunately answered
affirmatively to the question, “Are you big captain?” and was also
imprudent in giving an old lady a half-dozen ocres. He was at once
pounced upon by every one as lawful prey, and, what through begging,
extortion, and other means, the “big captain” was soon rid of all his
change, and might have been reduced to a state of nudity but for the
timely arrival of the governor, who took him home to dine and to lodge.
The soup, though sweet to the taste, was good; floating in it were
lemon-peel and raisins. Next came reindeer-steaks cooked in wine and
most delicious. Potatoes were the only vegetable. Cooking and serving
excellent. Brandy, beer, and wine in profusion. The meal terminated by a
general hand-shaking, according to custom, and the governor kissed his
wife. The lodging was equally agreeable, affording the luxury of a clean
feather bed. In the morning, and while yet in bed, a young Esquimaux
damsel in pantalets brought the American a cup of strong coffee with a
few crackers. That day he took on board the launch two Esquimaux,
Frederick Christiansen and Jans Edwards, lashing their kyacks behind,
also the seal-skin, dog-skin, and other clothing they had come for, and
at midnight left amid the hearty cheers of the natives and the tears and
lamentations of the friends of Jans and Frederick who had come to see
them off.

After an uneventful passage, and stopping only to add one hundred and
twenty-seven birds to their larder, the launch reached the ship at 10 A.
M. on the 25th. Lieutenant Kislingbury and a crew in the whale-boat
afterward went to Sanderson’s Hope Island and secured several hundred
more, so that there was no scarcity of fresh food. In the mean time some
new dogs were secured, so that the total number now on hand was
thirty-two.

The ship left Upernavik on the 29th, and, keeping the inner passage,
made her way toward the north.

While crossing Melville Bay on the 30th, there was no ice in sight
except bergs, and the sun shone brightly. That state of things was a
great surprise to the explorers, as here it was that McClintock was
frozen in for a whole year, and Nares congratulated himself in having
passed the bay without detention. Indeed, Melville Bay has always been
regarded as the _bête noire_ of Arctic travel. An Arctic bear found on a
broken pack of floating ice was killed by Lieutenant Kislingbury, and,
when hoisted on board, was found to weigh a thousand pounds and to
measure seven feet two inches in length. They were probably fifty miles
from land at the time.

On the last day of July, the Proteus party sighted land, which they
supposed to be Cape Dudley Diggs, north of Melville’s Bay. Much old
floating ice was seen, but so rotten as to offer no obstruction. Several
seals and many little auks were killed and secured.

About this time Lockwood and others observed tokens of disrespect and
insubordination on the part of some of the men, which were traced to a
certain corporal as ringleader. Lockwood watched him with care, and
urged the propriety of sending him home by the first opportunity, which
was afterward done.

On one occasion, toward evening, the voyagers witnessed the overturning
of an iceberg three hundred feet long and one hundred and fifty feet
high. After capsizing, it continued to revolve on several axes for some
time. Its change of base was preceded by the fall of several detached
pieces, thus shifting its center of gravity.

The next day, August 1st, was clear and cool, and without fog. Passed
Dudley Diggs at noon and then steered for Gary Islands, sighting them
three hours later. The officers looked hard for the crimson cliffs near
Dudley Diggs noticed by Sir John Ross, but observed only some slight
discoloration of the snow. The glacier near this cape seemed to be two
or three miles long; at the sea-shore, of inconsiderable height, but in
the background, attaining an imposing elevation. The ship’s compasses,
as usual in this latitude, were all crazy, occasioning some bewilderment
to the captain. The bear and seal meats were duly served on shipboard,
and pronounced palatable by all, though to some the bear-meat was
slightly fishy. Two boats with all the officers and others landed on the
most easterly of the Cary Islands, and proceeded at once to find and
inspect the _cache_ of provisions—thirty-six hundred rations—left there
by Sir George Nares for his own safety. They were apparently in good
condition, notwithstanding many of the barrels resting on their ends
afforded opportunity for rain and snow-water to enter. Some biscuits
were found moldy. Replaced the Nares record by a copy, and also left a
full record of the Proteus. There was found there an excellent
whale-boat, turned bottom upward, with oars and sails complete. This
Lockwood urged Lieutenant Greely to take along, but he preferred getting
the one at Foulke Point. The former regarded the supply of boats as too
small, and circumstances might arise which would cause them to regret
not using this one. They had only the steam-launch, a twenty-four-feet
whale-boat, and a small, fourteen-feet row-boat—the whale-boat being the
only one to be depended on in case of accident. The boat at Point Foulke
was thought to be inferior. They picked up driftwood, an oar, and some
burned pieces of a ship’s stem or stern. They also saw some red snow,
and shot several eider-ducks. The Cary Islands were found to be barren
masses of rocks without vegetation.

The steamer came to anchor at Littleton Island at 9 A. M. on the 2d of
August, just as the steering-gear gave way. A party went to “Life-boat
Cove” and brought back a number of articles left by the Polaris
Expedition of 1873. They saw neither Esquimaux nor reindeer, but shot a
walrus. Lieutenant Greely made an effort to find the cairn left there by
Nares, and the letters left for Nares by the Pandora. He found the
letters but not the cairn, though there was a dismantled cairn afterward
seen by others. Lockwood with a party of men put ashore several tons of
coal, which, as it had to be carried up some thirty feet above the
sea-level, he found no easy job. While thus engaged, this party had an
adventure with some walruses, not unattended with danger. Having excited
a drove of them by a simultaneous fire, the animals came toward the
boat, and at one time held its inmates in peril. Lockwood alone was
prepared to meet the foremost, and by good luck slew one of them, when
all the rest disappeared. The walrus can be killed only through the
brain, and when wounded, the animal is exceedingly ferocious. Numberless
boats have been destroyed by them. Lamont thinks the walrus superior to
the bear for food. Those they saw were evidently a female and her young,
and their safety was in having killed the mother. Littleton Island
affords a good illustration of these shores. The sides rise
precipitously, sometimes in steps composed of immense cubes of
trap-rock, sometimes in steep slopes formed from the crumbling of the
same. The top of the island is seven hundred feet high, according to
Nares, and generally quite level. Of soil, there is none. The summit
afforded a fine view of the sound, though somewhat obstructed by fog. No
floating ice; and the western coast with its snowy mountains quite
distinct.

Having crossed the strait during the night of the 2d of August, in the
early morning they ran along the western coast, which was very distinct
and picturesque, the bluffs and headlands being reflected by the smooth
sea. Striking the western coast near Cape Sabine, at 8 A. M. they
reached Cape Hawkes, a headland over a thousand feet high and very
picturesque. While Lieutenants Greely and Kislingbury visited the cairn
there, Dr. Pavy and Lieutenant Lockwood went to find the record on
Washington Irving Island, both left by Nares. They then continued their
way with slight interruptions from fogs until abreast of Franklin
Island, when they were obliged to lay-to because of fog. They had not
been delayed a moment by ice, and were surprised to see so little of it.
Their success emboldened them to hope that they might reach Lady
Franklin Bay without obstruction. Indeed, they even thought of inducing
Captain Pike to run on until he reached the north pole itself, or at
least till he attained a higher latitude than did Nares. One of the dogs
having died, they became impressed with the thought that the poor curs
suffered much from being cooped up and from the damp weather. The party
continued on their way up Kennedy Channel with everything favorable,
having the finest weather yet seen; air soft and balmy, sky clear, and
water smooth.

On reaching the vicinity of Franklin Island and Carl Ritter Bay, they
left there a small deposit of hard bread, pemmican, and rum, and
continued on their way rejoicing; and so onward until nearly 10 P. M.,
when, just above Cape Lieber, they encountered an impenetrable pack
extending all the way across the channel, and as far ahead as they could
see. The ship made a savage dash at it, but in vain, and thus, but eight
miles from Lady Franklin Bay, and with Cape Baird in full view, they
were brought to a standstill. The mountains along the coast were covered
with snow, but the valleys and low places were bare. The prominent
objects of the landscape were all distinctly seen from their
position—Capes Lieber and Baird on the left, Franklin, Hans, and Hanna
Islands in the rear and left, and, in the far distance, Polaris
Promontory and Petermann’s Fiord, with the glacier beyond. A party that
went on shore saw traces of the musk-ox, but no animals were seen.

Several of the officers and men attempted the ascent of the promontory
of Cape Lieber, a precipitous cliff three thousand feet high, which
seemed but a stone’s throw away, but to reach which required a long,
cold row, and then a fatiguing and painful climb. Lockwood and two only
of the party succeeded. The difficulty was in the giving way of the
crumbling slate-rock, which formed an incline of 45°. Those that reached
the summit were rewarded by a grand view, extending to the limit of
vision. On their return, after clambering over some rocks cropping out
of the slippery snow and ice, they chose a short cut and came down at a
run, or rather slide, followed by a miniature avalanche of _débris_. On
the 6th of August, it was found that the icy barrier, which evidently
came from the Polar Sea, was moving south, carrying the steamer along.
Some game was seen in both air and water, but none taken. Parties
attempted to reach the shore on the ice, but were recalled by signal, as
moving ice was seen from the ship, and also open water near the shore.

From this point they slowly drifted south, with high winds from the
north which opened up lanes of water which they did not think safe to
enter. The total drift amounted to ten miles. With the lowering of
temperature, it was suggested that it would be well to move across the
channel, along the pack, and, if needful, land on the Greenland shore,
possibly where Hall had wintered.

On the 11th of August, the ice barrier gave way under a change of wind
and weather, leaving the passage open. Under full steam and sail, and
with beautiful weather, they soon regained all the distance they had
lost by drift, passed Cape Lieber, and came abreast of Cape Baird.
Thence forcing their way through the broken ice of the bay, and reaching
Bellot Island, which marks the beginning of Discovery Harbor, they cut
their way to a secure spot for the ship to rest in. And thus ended the
voyage to Lady Franklin Bay or Sound. As this harbor, or a spot in its
vicinity called Fort Conger, was the one where the Signal-Service
station was to be established, the steamer Proteus here ended her
voyage, soon to return to Newfoundland. Discovery Harbor, which was to
be their home, is an indentation of the bay covered by Bellot Island on
the south. This indentation extends east and west some ten miles, and is
probably two or three miles from north to south. Inclosing the harbor on
three sides is a line of rugged bluffs and hills (or rather mountains,
for they are two thousand feet high), those on the east side sloping
back gradually, but elsewhere precipitous and rugged in the extreme.
Thus, with Bellot’s Island fifteen hundred feet high on the south, was
formed a harbor, landlocked and most admirably sheltered.




                                 VIII.
                 HOUSE-BUILDING AND LOCAL EXPLORATIONS.


Immediately after the explorers had anchored their ship in Discovery
Harbor, they saw a drove of musk-oxen leisurely ascending the
neighboring hills, which they climbed with the facility of goats. This
was indeed a cheerful prospect for men in so isolated a region and
without fresh meat, and many of them started forthwith in pursuit of the
game, working their way to the shore on the ice, but were compelled to
return after a vain attempt to follow the animals over the hills.

Hitherto there had been no opportunity to make any special discoveries,
but now a comparatively new field, to which the explorers were to devote
all their energies, came into view. Discovery, however, was to be always
subordinated to the duties of meteorological observations. As this
narrative proceeds, it will be seen that Lieutenant Lockwood was not
only eminently active at all times, but most successful as an explorer.

It being desirable to establish the station as near as possible to the
coal-mine on Watercourse Bay, Lockwood was dispatched with Messrs. Clay
and Ryan, to report as to the practicability of carrying out this, the
original intention. According to the map prepared by Nares, this bay
lies seven miles distant on the strait, and is separated from Discovery
Harbor by the mountain-ridge on the east, which terminates southward in
Distant Cape. They attempted the passage across these hills, following a
ravine leading in the proper direction, and had gone only a short
distance when they saw seven musk-oxen quietly grazing. Making a
_détour_, they thought to take them unawares, but soon saw them move
away to some distance up a steep incline. Expending vainly a few shots
at long range, they followed the animals up the hill, over a steep ledge
of rocks, and into a valley on the other side. Here the men halted,
concealed from view, and arranged plans for their capture. The animals
were covered by precipitous rocks on one side. Clay, Ryan, and Lockwood
approached them simultaneously on the other three sides, and thus had
them surrounded and at their mercy. Some depressions and other
irregularities of the ground enabled the hunters, by crouching low down,
to approach the game unawares. Clay firing first, the whole herd rushed
toward Lockwood’s side, closing up as it came, and, seeing him, made a
charge. Dropping on one knee, he threw his cartridges down and blazed
away with great rapidity. Many shots telling, the animals halted before
him only a few rods off, and at once attempted a flank movement; but now
Clay and Ryan closing up, the herd was check-mated. In five minutes from
the first shot every animal of the herd—five grown and two calves—lay
dead before the hunters. The hunters were sorry they had killed the
calves, but in the excitement it could hardly have been otherwise. They
then returned to the ship to report their success, and to have the
carcasses brought in. This addition to their larder was the occasion of
great joy, not only as giving a present supply of fresh meat, but in its
promise for the future; not only as a luxury, but as the only certain
means of warding off the scurvy, so much and so justly dreaded by Arctic
explorers.

After supper of that day, Lockwood, ever ready for adventure, again
started for Watercourse Bay, accompanied by Clay, Ralston, and the mate
of the Proteus. Following the small stream, which came into the harbor
at this point, for three miles, by an easy and regular ascent between
lofty mountains on either side with a slope of about forty-five degrees,
and over ground and patches of snow thrown up like potato-hills, they
reached its head, and there, fortunately, found another stream running
in the other direction. Following this, they were brought to Watercourse
Creek, which runs into Watercourse Bay. Being uncertain whether the
coal-mine, said to be on this creek, was above or below this point, they
followed the creek up-stream three miles, when, not finding it, they
retraced their steps to the point where they entered the creek, and,
finding it impossible to follow the bed, climbed the bank. Here they saw
two more musk-oxen, which they slew by strategy as before, and, opening
the carcasses with penknives, left them to be carried in. Coming near
the mouth of the creek, Lockwood saw indications of coal, and soon after
reached the exposed seam of one hundred yards’ extent by twenty-five
feet depth, distant about three fourths of a mile from the sea. This
coal is said to equal the best of Welsh production. Near here, they saw
another musk-ox, whose life they spared for the time, as they had so
much meat in store. Lockwood found, and so reported, that, though
Watercourse Bay had the merit of a near coalmine, and was nearer the
grounds of future explorations, it was not possible to use it at once
for the unloading ship without great risk and labor because of moving
ice. Discovery Harbor, though full of ice from sixteen inches to ten
feet thick, was perfectly landlocked and unobstructed. Ralston preceded
the party home, killing one musk-ox _en route_. The Arctic summer was
now at its height, lichen, moss, saxifrage, and various other little
red, yellow, and blue flowers, bright red moss, and tufts of green grass
at intervals, breaking the monotony of the somber rocks and earth. But
the enjoyment of these beauties of nature could not then be indulged in,
as all hands had to take part in unloading the ship, a labor which was
soon accomplished.

The next business in order with the explorers was to build a house, and
they selected a site facing the water, fifty feet from, and fifteen feet
above it. While this work was progressing, the men lived in tents.

On the 19th of August, all hands were sent ashore, and the Proteus
started on her return, but, passing too near Bellot Island for safety,
was caught in the ice and delayed. Lockwood made an effort to follow in
her wake with the steam-launch, but failed, because of the rapid closing
in of the great masses of broken ice and the wedging of small ice-masses
into the screw and well. The launch battled manfully with her foe, the
ice. Frequently he ran her under a full head of steam against a massive
floe, which would be shivered for a few inches, the recoil causing the
launch to roll and pitch like a little giant. In young ice she would
sometimes split a sheet for ten or fifteen yards at one impact.

Finding nothing to do while the house-building was progressing,
Lieutenants Lockwood and Kislingbury occupied themselves with tramping
after ptarmigans and other game over the mountains whose steep sides
formed the eastern entrance of the harbor, and the northern boundary.
Viewed from the house, their sides seemed gradual and their summits not
over twenty minutes’ walk. In fact, however, the sides were successions
of slopes separated by precipices, growing greater with the ascent. What
below seemed the top was only one of many that must be passed before the
real summit or divide could be attained. They reached the summit marked
by the English cairn, and from there viewed the scene below. How small
the ship appeared! and yet it seemed as though they could throw a stone
upon her. They reached home with wolfish appetites, but with no game.
The ptarmigans, which they chiefly sought, are provided, at this season,
with a coat so nearly resembling the shade of the rocks and grounds as
to be almost indistinguishable. By a happy provision of nature, in
winter the feathers of this bird become white with only a little black
about the tail.

The lieutenants then extended their excursions over the mountains on the
north side of the harbor, availing themselves of a ravine, called the
“Black Cañon,” which leads to a pretty waterfall. Climbing out of this
cañon with difficulty over loose slate and other _débris_, they found
themselves on the high backgrounds of the North Mountains. Thence moving
west over loose rock and snow, and through pools of water, they finally
came in sight of Musk-ox Bay, the western extremity of Discovery Harbor.
They then retraced their steps, reaching home without having seen a
living object bigger than an humble-bee.

On the 23d, the house was occupied, though not finished. Looking after
their supplies, they found that the foxes had made free with the
carcasses of the musk-oxen left near Watercourse Bay. Lockwood now
proceeded to superintend the laying out of the observatory, digging for
foundation pier of transit, etc. He found the ground frozen after
reaching thirty inches, which may be taken as the depth where perpetual
frost begins. The ship being still detained, but with a prospect of soon
getting off, Lockwood wrote more letters home in which he expressed an
opinion about the Proteus. Her chances of departing south were doubtful.
Detention there for the winter would be embarrassing all around, as
neither the ship nor her crew were prepared to stay, nor the explorers
able to help them through the winter.

Just before her final departure, some difficulty arose between
Lieutenants Greely and Kislingbury, which ended in the latter making a
request to be relieved from duty with the expedition, which request was
granted. One of the annoyances complained of was the rule that officers
should rise in the morning with the men, and although Lockwood advised
Kislingbury not to make any further trouble, he decided to pack up,
board the Proteus, and return home. In this, however, he was not
successful, as the steamer got away before he could reach her, and the
order for his relief was somewhat modified. After explaining his action
in this matter, Lieutenant Greely remarked that, if anything should
happen to him, he desired that Lieutenant Lockwood should have command
of the expedition. Lockwood expressed himself as very sorry for what his
fellow-officer had done, and could not understand his course of action.

As soon as the building was entirely finished, on the 27th of August,
the explorers found themselves very comfortable. The dull, cheerless
weather and monotonous life were beginning to depress the spirits of
Lockwood, but he felt that, when settled down to regular habits, he
would not find the life in the north more irksome than that he had
experienced on the Western plains of the United States. It may be
mentioned that the final opening of the house, or government station,
was commemorated by the issuing of an order from Lieutenant Greely, that
the exploring expedition along the northern coast of Greenland, which
had been marked out for Lieutenant Kislingbury as senior officer, was to
be placed in command of Lieutenant Lockwood. He now felt that the
opportunity for doing something creditable, for his own as well as his
country’s reputation, was at hand, and his feelings of depression gave
way to those of enthusiasm.

On Sunday, the 28th of August, all work was suspended, and some
appropriate notice was taken of the day. Lieutenant Greely read a
chapter in the Bible, having previously stated that any one would be
excused from attending the service who had conscientious scruples. The
supply of drinking-water having come up as an important question,
demanded attention. The water was obtained from the ice-hummocks in the
harbor. Pieces of suitable size were brought to the house on sledges and
then melted in a large metallic box near the stove, through which and
the stove ran a steam-pipe. Thus a liberal supply was kept up.

Wishing to establish a depot on the channel for future explorations,
Lockwood left with Sergeants Brainard and Cross to explore St. Patrick’s
Bay, lying northeast of the station and on the straits. The ground being
covered with snow, the Government boots were soon soaked though, and the
feet of the party became wet and cold. Following a ravine, they soon
reached a lake near the summit of the hills in the rear, where they saw
a musk-ox grazing on the bank. The animal fled on seeing them, but
stopped farther on. Approaching him under cover, Lockwood got a standing
shot and brought him down. Skinning him and dividing the carcass into
quarters, they left the meat for others to carry in and went on their
tramp, which took them midway between the “hog-back,” an elevated
plateau on the north, and the rugged broken chain of mountains which lie
between Discovery Harbor and Robeson Channel. About noon they reached
St. Patrick’s Bay, but at a point so different from that laid down in
their maps, that Lockwood felt some doubt as to its identity, to settle
which, they proceeded to explore a wide river-bed, followed by a deep
cañon, which led into the bay near its head. With this view, and to see
the country to better advantage, they kept north along the steep rocky
sides of the “hog-back,” over rocks, great and small, compact and loose,
and generally covered with snow. After two hours of laborious travel,
they found themselves high above the riverbed and in a position giving
them a good view north and east. The main stream seemed to come from the
north, with a branch from the west, the whole through lands of the most
rugged description. Beyond the river to the east, the hills were more
sloping, yet rising to an immense altitude between the river and the
channel beyond. It seemed not difficult to descend into the bed of the
river, walk up its frozen course, and, taking advantage of some break in
the cliffs a few miles up, gain by a gradual ascent the high hills
beyond, thus obtaining a view of Robeson Channel. The descent, over
rocks, stones, and snow, involving great fatigue, took two hours. This
brought them to a level terrace extending from cliffs to cliffs, through
the center of which ran a deep cut or channel containing the
insignificant stream, the sole occupant of this immense cañon. They
gained the frozen stream with difficulty, cut through the ice and got a
drink, and then regained the level terrace above, and began their steep
climb up the mountain beyond, through a friendly ravine. One hour’s work
brought them to an elevation which, at a distance, had seemed to be the
main summit, only to find that farther on there were still higher
points. Finally, at 6 P. M., they reached an elevation where the slope
seemed to be eastward, and from which a magnificent view was obtained of
the channel from Cape Lieber to Repulse Harbor, while directly east of
them lay Newman’s Bay and Polaris Promontory. After erecting a cairn,
they started back, cold and hungry, satisfied that they had seen the
true St. Patrick’s Bay.

Regaining the river-valley, they had a most fatiguing climb to attain
the pass through which they had come, and where they had killed the
musk-ox. Just east of the lake, they encountered Dr. Pavy and Rice, and
soon after Ralston and Lynn, going to Lincoln Bay _via_ St. Patrick’s
Bay. Our party reached home at midnight, with frost-bitten feet and
empty stomachs, Lockwood finding his stockings full of ice and one toe
badly frost-bitten.

He was laid up for a week with frosted feet, and had apprehension of
losing some of his toes. Although suffering greatly, he was made
especially unhappy by the thought of being disabled so early in the
campaign. Discussing the subject of scurvy with Lieutenant Greely, they
agreed in regarding the explorers much better provided against it, than
was the British expedition, in that their dietary list was more
complete. The English issued fresh beef but once a week; the Greely
Expedition three times or oftener. This expedition had also the great
advantage of a dry, warm, well-ventilated house.

Lockwood’s report as to St. Patrick’s Bay settling that as the place for
their first depot, Sergeant Brainard with others proceeded to establish
the same there by means of the whale-boat, moving around Cape Distant.
Lockwood was much annoyed that his disability prevented his being one of
those to carry out this important feature toward their future
explorations. He took advantage of his non-active condition to figure
out a design for an “ice-sledge,” which he thought would be an
improvement on the Hudson Bay sledge they had in use. Lieutenant Greely
approving the plan, he proceeded at once to build one by way of
experiment. The duty assigned to Brainard was duly accomplished, and
Depot A was established at St. Patrick’s Bay.

Having received a gentle reminder from Lieutenant Greely for
oversleeping himself, Lockwood said he could not complain, the offense
not being his first of the kind. The singular clearness of the
atmosphere had enabled him to make satisfactory sketches of Cape Lieber
and other prominent objects in the distance, and also of the house.

Among the events which made the early days of September somewhat lively
were the following: Gardiner reported a waif, in the shape of a boat
twelve feet long and an eight-men sledge, on the shore near Cape
Murchison. Lieutenant Greely with others, and Lieutenant Kislingbury as
a guest, went upon a two-days’ trip to the Bellows in search of game and
to view the land. They were successful in securing ten musk-oxen, a
dozen or more eider-ducks, and some other game. Sergeant Lynn, returning
from Cape Beechy, reported a wagon and lamp on the shore, left by the
English.

Dr. Pavy returned from Lincoln Bay, but Rice, taken on the return with
severe inflammatory rheumatism, was left four miles north of St.
Patrick’s Bay. A party was at once sent for his relief, which brought
him in, in a bad way. Great difficulty was found in lifting him up the
steep cliffs between the station and St. Patrick’s Bay.

Lockwood, having recovered from his injuries, went upon an expedition to
the Bellows with Gardiner and the Esquimaux Frederick, using an
eight-dog sledge and carrying rations for four days, consisting of
roasted musk-ox, baked beans, butter and sauce, hard bread, and
chocolate. They visited Bleak Cape, the entrance of the Bellows. The
Bellows they found to be a long, level valley, walled in by lofty hills
and cliffs, in some places two or three thousand feet high. It bears the
impress of having been, at some far-distant period, the channel of a
glacier, its level surface being thickly strewn with stones, while there
are masses attached like shelves to the sides of the cliffs and slopes.
For twenty miles, the valley preserves a width of nearly three miles;
beyond this, it narrows and changes direction toward the west. A small
creek runs through its entire length, which generally they followed. The
route was difficult, owing to the large number of stones imperfectly
covered with snow, and hence all riding ceased after they entered the
valley; for the dogs could scarcely pull the sledge and its load, and
often required aid. Here they met a piece of drift-wood, indicating that
the tide once flowed up the valley, for no tree or wood had ever been
seen away from tide-water. One of the dogs becoming sick was turned
adrift, trusting to her following the party or returning home. Reaching
“Devil’s Head,” they went into camp by turning up the sledge and hanging
rubber blankets around to shield them from the cold wind, and then ate a
supper of warmed-up beans and hot chocolate, and tumbled into the
sleeping-bags, all of which they found most enjoyable.

After a breakfast of chocolate, hard bread, and some frozen cheese, they
were delighted to see the sick dog rejoin them. The sledge-runners were
rapidly wearing out, and they concluded to walk to the end of the
valley, leaving the Esquimaux with the sledge and team while they pushed
on as best they could.

Lockwood and Gardiner reached the head of the valley at four, and,
proceeding up the incline to the west where it narrowed to a ravine,
went on till they came to a narrow gorge—its terminus. Having seen all
there was to see, and Gardiner complaining of a game leg, they retraced
their steps, reached the sledge at 10 P. M., and at once, supperless,
turned into their sleeping-bags. Near the terminus of the valley they
met two musk-oxen, but, having only their knives with them, did not
venture on an assault, though the animals stood still and quietly gazed
at the intruders.

Returning, they followed the creek, finding some advantage from the ice
which had formed during the night. Lockwood saw and took back with him a
few pieces of wood-coal, or very soft coal, evidently of recent
formation, which had doubtless washed down, but whence he knew not.
Reaching Bleak Cape, they decided to make a _détour_ west to a cañon
near the “Knife-edge,” where the musk-oxen were killed by Lieutenant
Greely and party a few days before; but no musk-ox, dead or alive, was
to be seen. Gardiner being still lame, Lockwood abandoned some other
objects he had in view in making this trip, and, striking out directly
across the bay and riding on the sledge, they reached the station
without incident.

Dr. Pavy made an unsuccessful attempt to reach an estuary at the head of
Lady Franklin Bay, from which Lieutenant Greely thought a passage might
be forced westward to a supposed fiord or sea connected with the waters
leading through Behring Strait into the Pacific Ocean. Unfortunately,
finding Lady Franklin Bay open beyond Stony Point, the doctor returned
without settling this interesting question, which, as will be seen,
Lieutenant Lockwood afterward solved.

Sixteen, or more, large Arctic wolves were seen in one day on the ice, a
few hundred yards from the house. These were the first seen by them; the
English saw none here, nor do Kane, Hayes, or Hall mention them. These
wolves are large, strong, fierce-looking beasts, perfectly white in
color, and anything but desirable customers to meet.

Lieutenant Greely, and Sergeants Brainard, Bender, and Connell, left on
an exploration above and beyond “North Valley,” a deep cañon cutting
through the “hog’s back” north of the station. They left without
sledges, carrying six days’ rations, sleeping-bags, etc. Following the
“North Valley” upward, and leaving it near its head, they soon found
themselves in a water-course running toward St. Patrick’s Bay. Turning
westward, and going some distance, they came in sight of what they
regarded as the United States Range; but, a heavy snow-storm coming on,
they cut short the trip after traveling twenty-five miles, and returned.
It was deemed unfortunate that the untoward weather prevented their
getting a good view from that range. The absence of glaciers and large
water-courses, the low altitude of the range, and many other features in
that region, all seemed to indicate a large sea not far to the westward.

The building of Lockwood’s sledge turned out a failure, for the want of
proper appliances.

On the 17th of September, the party celebrated Whistler’s birthday by a
dinner of his own selection—oyster soup, roast musk-ox, potatoes, corn,
pear-butter, cake, etc., and a glass of grog in the evening. Two-story
bunks were built for the men, giving more room. The Signal-Service
men—the observers—had a little corner partitioned off, where they were
to sleep and work. Another corner was fitted as a wash-room, where warm
water might be had, and where there was a bath-tub, which all were
expected to use every week. Other arrangements had been provided
productive of comfort and health. Lockwood’s time was now chiefly
occupied in drawing maps, making finished drawings from sketches,
reading, and sledge-work.

Dr. Pavy, with a party, went to take provisions to the depots, but
failed to get round Cape Murchison. Not satisfying Lieutenant Greely,
the latter himself undertook the task, and, after considerable
difficulty, in which the sledge broke down, succeeded. On the 21st the
sun presented a remarkable appearance, having rainbows to the right and
left, which nearly joined above; also radiating vertical and horizontal
beams of light.

Lieutenant Kislingbury, after many futile efforts with arsenic,
succeeded in poisoning many wolves with strychnine. Five of them bit the
dust at one time, and by this means the party was able to get rid of
these dangerous neighbors. This animal, as stated, is perfectly white,
and is not unlike the Esquimaux dog, but larger and more formidable.

On the 24th of September, Lockwood started on a trip to Cape Beechy with
Ellis, Fredericks, Ralston, Biederbick, and one large sledge, to
provision Depot “A,” distant twenty miles. They started with two hundred
and fifty pounds on the sledge, intending to take on other food left
near Cape Distant. Their passage around this cape was accomplished only
after cutting away masses of ice. Beyond this, and with their load
increased to three hundred and fifty pounds, they struck masses of rocks
over which the sledge and load had to be lifted. There they left the
photograph apparatus for Rice, and took lunch. Afterward they passed
Watercourse Bay, and the English wagon lying on the shore, and halted
for the night at 6 P. M. at Cape Murchison, without any remonstrance on
the part of the tired-out men, notwithstanding some of them, about noon,
had proposed going on to Cape Beechy without a stop. Indeed, Lockwood
observed anxious faces among them when he hesitated about stopping.
Floe-bergs of every form and shape—square, oblong, round, and
pyramidal—from ten to forty feet high, were scattered along the shore.
Without the barrier afforded by these, the floating floe, moving with
the noise of railroad-trains, would cut away the foot-ice and render
travel impossible. Using the tent at Depot “A,” and the bedding, etc.,
there, they got supper over the spirit-lamp and crawled into their
sleeping-bags. The cold, cramped position, and dropping of congealed
moisture from the tent, robbed them of sleep; hence they rose at 5.20,
little refreshed. Beautiful “sun-dogs” were noticed with the rising of
the sun across the strait. Toward noon similar appearances, peculiar to
the Arctic sun, were still more remarkable—rainbows on either side, and
joined above the sun, while vertical and horizontal beams of white light
pierced the sun. They passed St. Patrick’s Bay, and, after a hard and
cold day’s work, reached Depot “B,” south of Mount Bufort and a little
farther south of Cape Beechy, at 3 P. M., the 25th. On the following
day, dragging an empty sledge, they returned to the _cache_ at St.
Patrick’s Bay, loaded up with three hundred and fifty pounds, and
returned to Depot “B,” tired, cold, and wet with perspiration, this last
being, perhaps, the greatest obstacle to Arctic travel. The great
exertion soon induces perspiration, which being checked when labor
ceases, you are at once sensible of cold water and ice at the same time.
It was rare to have anything entirely dry after the first day of work.
The sole resource was to use the heat of the body in the sleeping-bags
at night. Mittens and socks were the most important to keep dry, and the
most difficult. Their lamps being imperfect, they found a difficulty in
preparing their chocolate. The alcohol took fire below and filled the
tent with fumes quite as unpleasant as the cold. Having left their tin
plates behind, they had to eat from one dish. Eating was simply
cramming, that their benumbed fingers might give up the cold spoons and
return to the warm pockets. Yet with all these discomforts they ate
heartily, and with appetites unknown elsewhere than in the Arctic
regions; and, notwithstanding dirt, cold, and alcoholic fumes, they had
their jokes and songs while lying in their sleeping-bags, trying to keep
warm and get to sleep. But their ills did not end there, for whenever
the canvas was shaken, frost-like snow—condensed vapor—fell upon them,
which melted with the lighting of the lamp in the morning. Truly, this
was a rough road to glory and fame!

Two of the men, in consequence of the crowded tent, had to sleep outside
with the thermometer at -15°, and left without breakfast, to return to
the station. The party soon followed them, and, after stopping at St.
Patrick’s Bay to take on a log of driftwood observed there, which gave
them an additional pull of five miles, reached the station long after
dark. Having taken something to eat and drink, they got into their warm
and dry beds, which never felt more comfortable.

The next man to command a party was Dr. Pavy, who had in view a
long-projected trip to Cape Joseph Henry, with the object of carrying
out the wishes of the Navy Department, that a search should be made
there for the Jeannette, and a signal placed indicating that help was
near at hand; another object was to establish a depot for spring
operations. His force consisted of the Esquimaux Jans, Whistler, and two
dog-teams. His “constant weight” was two hundred pounds, and he took
rations for twenty days. He counted upon other rations at Lincoln Bay
left by the English, and those nearer home left by Greely’s men at Depot
“B,” near Cape Beechy. He hoped with these to establish a depot near the
place where the Alert had her winter quarters, and thus be ready in the
spring to surpass Markham. Lockwood was inclined to think the doctor a
little too anxious to retain personal comfort while exploring, to
accomplish much. He had been convinced that sledge-journeys of any
considerable extent in those high latitudes could be made only by the
sacrifice of every personal comfort.

On the 2d of October, there was a remarkable and beautiful sunset. The
lower part of the picture was formed by the clear white ice of the
harbor westward. Then came the distant mountains, whose snow-capped
summits reached into a sky of beautiful green; above, a line of gold,
and then blue and gold alternating, and finally the deep-blue vault
studded with masses of red—on the whole a most gorgeous spectacle.

Finding this inactive life monotonous, Lockwood started on an
exploration of the streams which enter St. Patrick’s Bay from the north.
Lynn, Bender, Saler, Henry, and himself constituted the party, and they
proposed going by way of the gap through the mountains rather than
around Distant Cape. They had not gone far before they regretted having
taken this short cut, for they found the way exceedingly laborious from
want of snow—so much so, that they were six hours in reaching the steep,
rocky bluffs which overlook St. Patrick’s Bay and the valley at the
north of it, and they were two more before reaching the level of the
bay. Indeed, this was only attained by carrying their load piece by
piece down the cliffs and letting the sledge down by ropes. Here they
put up their tent and went into camp. Unfortunately, they had neglected
to bring candles, and hence had to eat their meal in darkness. Lockwood
and Saler occupied one sleeping-bag, while the others were in another.
They passed the night cold and sleepless. There being a birthday dinner
at the station, they had intended to walk back to it, a distance of
seven miles, but, on account of the condition of the way, abandoned the
idea.

Getting off at an early hour after a cold breakfast, and reaching the
bed of the water-course, they made their way over its stony bed, so
lightly covered with snow as to rapidly grind away the sledge-runners,
up the cañon, as grand as the stream was insignificant. Finding their
progress so much impeded, they left the sledge behind and made their way
without it. The cold being intense, to keep up circulation they walked
rapidly, but suffered greatly in their feet and hands. Having
volunteered for this expedition, they were ashamed to give it up, though
often disposed to do so. Thus, for three tiresome hours, they kept on
their way, either following the bed of the stream, or along the
mesa-like formations, which projected like shelves from the
mountain-sides. Finally, the valley and mesas alike disappearing, the
stream entered a narrow gorge. Gaining an eminence, the further course
of the stream was indicated to them, and its probable terminus in
table-lands of great elevation seen in the distance. Returning by the
bed of the stream until the valley had attained a width of half a mile,
they entered from the west a very picturesque cañon thirty feet wide
with walls one hundred feet high. Its walls were worn smooth, as though
by the action of ice, and there were small, basin-shaped holes
apparently made by bowlders caught by glaciers. They also met with
blocks of quartz much larger than could possibly be moved by the force
of any body of water now passing through the cañon. Notwithstanding
their exhausted condition, and the worn state of their foot-gear from
the numerous stones and rough ice they had passed over, they concluded
not to spend the night where they had left the sledge, but to go on to
Depot “A,” near Cape Murchison. Adding their outfit to that of the
depot, they had a night of less discomfort than usual. On passing Cape
Distant, they noticed a broad channel of open water in the strait,
preventing any passage at that time.

On reaching the station, they found that the temperature had been -16°,
and it was probably 4° lower where they had been. Lieutenant Greely was
putting in order a variety of reading-matter for the men. Sergeant
Brainard was absent at the Bellows, with Rice and Bender, after musk-ox
meat. They returned later, badly frosted, but brought the meat to within
easy sledging distance.

The 7th of October, being Mrs. Greely’s birthday, was celebrated with a
dinner made regal by the following-named dishes: gumbo-soup, biscuits,
old sherry, Columbia River salmon with sauce sauterne, boiled ham,
asparagus, sago, corn, lima-beans, cold bread, chocolate cake,
strawberry and pineapple ice-cream, dates, figs, grapes, prunes, candied
fruits, coffee, and Benedictine.

In Payer’s “History of the Austrian Expedition to Franz-Josef Land,”
Lockwood found much of interest in connection with the requirements for
a sledge-journey—details of clothing and other matters best suited to
fit one to stand the cold. The book he considered of great value to any
novice in Arctic sledging. He supposed that they themselves were much
better off than any expedition that had wintered within the Arctic
Circle. The most serious difficulties—dampness, want of ventilation, and
darkness—were reduced with them to a minimum, while of fresh meat,
anti-scorbutics, and fuel they had an abundance; and if their assortment
of clothing—particularly foot-gear—had been better, they would have had
nothing to desire.

Besides the large stock of coal left by the Proteus, they had the
coal-mine within ten miles. The men seemed comfortable and contented.
They had a bathroom and bath-tub, with hot and cold water ready at hand,
and books and periodicals in abundance. Their heating arrangements were
generally perfect and quite effectual. The light from the sun amounted
to little, and artificial light within-doors was required all day; but
with a full moon, bright sky, and everything covered with snow, they had
a flood of light almost an equivalent. They had musk-ox meat almost
every day, and a large store on hand. They also had a large supply of
the best pork, lime-juice, cider, sour-krout, pickles, onions and
cucumbers mixed, and other anti-scorbutics. The men were comfortable,
seemed happy and cheerful, and found many sources of amusement—among
others, from an anti-swearing society. Delinquents were fined five cents
each, the proceeds to pay for a grand dinner on returning to the United
States. Several members incurred such enormous fines as to become
bankrupt, and were expelled. These outcasts lay around and beguiled the
unwary, thus affording amusement to all except the victim. Rice and
Israel had a way of carrying on ridiculous discussions. One evening they
had an apparently angry dialogue, in which Rice personated a tipsy
lodger complaining of the fare and demanding his bill, and Israel, an
insulted landlord. Both seemed entirely in earnest, and kept their
countenances amid roars of laughter and gibes from the men.




                                  IX.
        PRELIMINARY SLEDGE EXPEDITIONS AND LIFE AT THE STATION.


Among the amusements which helped to kill time at the station of
Discovery Harbor, officially called Fort Conger, was that of celebrating
certain birthdays, and this chapter begins with what was done when
Lieutenant Lockwood attained his twenty-ninth year. He confessed that he
did not wish a “happy return of the day” in the Arctic regions, and yet
he would be contented if they should all be as pleasant as the one just
experienced, in spite of the cold winds, ice, snow, darkness, and
anticipations of exposure and fatigue when his spring travels should
begin. He spent most of the day in sewing canvas leggings to his
moccasins and altering his trousers, while Lieutenant Greely entertained
him with recollections of his army experience during the rebellion,
fighting his battles over again. His birthday dinner was something quite
formidable, consisting of:

  Pea soup à la Proteus,
  Scalloped oysters à la Eastern Shore,
  Deviled crabs à la Chesapeake,
  Musk-ox à la Franklin Bay,
  Potatoes à l’Irlandaise,
  Macaroni à l’Italienne,
  Rice and curry à la Pacific Mail,
  Blanc-mange, fruits, nuts, cake, ice-cream, and black coffee.

Lieutenant Greely kindly added, from private stores, some very good
California port wine. Lockwood’s reflections, however, carried him to
his distant home, and he longed to know that all there were well—that
his dear parents and sisters were happy as when he was with them!
Perhaps, even at that hour, their thoughts and words were of him. On
this day, as frequently on his sledging journeys, he pictured to himself
the family circle in the far-off home. The cold, fatigue, and monotony
attending him and his companions were rendered endurable by thus
breaking away from the present.

On the morning of the 10th of October, Lockwood started on a trip with
Jewell across Lady Franklin Bay for Cape Baird. Had no difficulty for a
mile or two beyond Dutch Island, but mist and fog then obscuring their
way and blotting out the landscape, they kept on their course by
compass. Soon they encountered heavy snow-drifts and many floe-bergs and
fields of rubble-ice, all unfavorable for sledging. Fortunately, they
had only themselves to transport. Though the weather was cold, they soon
found themselves oppressively warm from the labor attending the journey.
Profiting by past experience, Lockwood had this time come out warmly
dressed—viz., with two flannel shirts, a woolen jersey, an under-shirt
of light buckskin, heavy woolen drawers, a seal-skin over-all, and two
pairs of socks under light buckskin moccasins. He then became convinced,
that it was quite as great a mistake to wear too much as too little
clothing. Even when they could ride on the sledge, which was not often,
there were numerous bad places where they had to run with the dogs and
lift the sledge over obstacles. Trying to avoid the moving ice, they
struck too far westward, so that when they approached land they found
themselves some two miles within the cape for which they had started.
Stopping only to take a bite of crackers and meat, they started to
retrace their steps, but not before daylight had left them, and they had
only the moon to show them the way. After some time they thought to
reduce the distance by taking what they supposed was a short cut, but
soon found themselves scrambling over hummocky ice of the most
formidable character. They regained their track, but not till overcome
by thirst and fatigue. Resting at short intervals, they finally came in
sight of Dutch Island, and soon afterward were gladdened by the sound of
distant shouts. Dr. Pavy and Sergeants Brainard and Connell had come out
to meet them, and not empty-handed, for they bore a bag of hot coffee,
and never did coffee taste more delicious. Though the mercury was nearly
nine degrees below zero, when they reached the house everything they had
on was as wet as if they had fallen overboard.

The result of that reconnaissance was that they decided to establish a
“depot” near Cape Baird, which labor was duly carried out by Lockwood,
Ellis, Saler, and Bender. The weather being open, they started directly
for Cape Baird, but, finding that route impracticable, inclined westward
and got into their old track. After much delay and great labor, they
reached a point on the farther side, where they found it necessary to
encamp for the night. The tent was pitched, chocolate boiled, and beans
thawed out, after which they crawled into their sleeping-bags, trying to
forget, if possible, that the thermometer stood at -24° without.
Resuming their journey, but now with the discomfort of wind added to
intense cold, they made their way ashore, established the depot of
provisions, and with lightened sledges and hearts retraced their steps.
Noses were frozen during the day, and only restored by friction, which
made them raw and uncomfortable. Very soon after starting back, twilight
disappeared, and they had only the moon to light them on their way.
Passing the resting-place of the previous night, they concluded to make
the journey to the house without stopping. They stumbled on in the dark,
a used-up party, Lockwood having a sprained tendon Achilles, and also a
lame back. The air becoming calm, they were enabled to stop sometimes
and rest, which they could not have safely done in their perspiring
condition had the wind been blowing. When near Dutch Island, Dr. Pavy
and Lieutenant Kislingbury met them with hot coffee, which so much
refreshed them that the rest of the journey seemed easy, although it was
probable that Lockwood’s raw red nose, frosted toes, lame back, and
tender heel, would be reminders of this trip for a long time.

On the 16th of October the sun disappeared, to rise no more until
February. With the mercury ranging from -28° to -40°, Lockwood amused
himself by scraping off the accumulated condensation of moisture from
the room on the window-panes near his corner, the ice being one inch
thick.

About this time Lockwood took up a course of Arctic literature, with
which they were liberally supplied. This was chiefly in view of his
sledge-journey in the coming spring. Feeling the need of exercise, he
left the station on the 23d for Depot “B,” Cape Beechy, with Brainard,
Connell, and the Esquimaux Frederick, and a sledge with eight dogs. At
Depot “A” they took on a small stove and a bag of coal from the mines,
and thereby the tent at Depot “B” became more comfortable than anything
they had experienced away from the station; notwithstanding, they had a
comfortless night, as the crowded condition of the tent compelled some
of them to lie so near the stove as to endanger their safety. Lockwood
woke up to find a large hole burned in his blanket. Afterward, the fire
going out, they suffered more than when they had had no fire at all.
They erected a snow-house for a depot here, forming the sides of tough
blocks of compact snow, and covering it with the boat-sail supported by
oars, and, by imitating the natives in some particulars, had a house
impervious to cold.

While there, Lockwood, with Brainard, ascended Mount Bufort, near at
hand, and had an uninterrupted view of the straits as far down as Cape
Lieber, and of the opposite coast, between which and them hung
water-clouds, indicating open water. This fact was also indicated by the
roar, like a moving railroad-train, made by the crushing of the ice in
the current. Having passed another night in their warm snow-house, they
made their way next day to the station in less than five hours, and
found all hands there engaged in erecting an ice wall around the house
as high as the eaves, and filling in with snow. This proved most
effectual in keeping the house warm.

Lieutenant Greely had an uncomfortable experience while assisting to
make a tide-gauge. He fell in and got a ducking—not his first experience
in that direction. Wolves were daily seen near the house, and were so
bold and fearless that the men deemed it prudent never to leave the
building without fire-arms; for, as the animals were of the same color
as the snow, they could not be easily distinguished.

On the 29th, a singular aurora made its appearance, consisting of a
ribbon of white light a degree wide, stretching through the zenith from
north to south; then another arch, 10° westward, whose base touched the
first; and still another, also passing through the zenith, and cutting
the others at right angles.

On the 30th, Lockwood commenced preparations for a preliminary journey
to Hall’s winter quarters, whenever the straits could be crossed and the
weather and light were suitable. Among other things, the saddler,
Fredericks, made a tent to hold eight men, using to that end two common
“A” tents.

About this time, while cogitating on his room and room-mates, Lockwood
said: “Surely this is a happy quartet occupying this room! We often sit
silent during the whole day, and even a meal fails to elicit anything
more than a chance remark or two. A charming prospect for four months of
darkness, such gloom within, and penned up as we are in one room! I have
doubts of getting over the straits, but I must be off as soon as
possible, for I find a relief in getting away.”

Lieutenant Greely had felt himself compelled to show his dissatisfaction
with Dr. Pavy’s explorations, or rather attempted explorations. He and
the doctor had also adverse views as to how explorations should be made.
The doctor wanted to take along many creature comforts, while Greely
thought, with Lockwood, that nothing could be accomplished without
sacrificing all beyond bare necessities.

Having everything complete, Lockwood started on the 1st of November to
try the passage of the straits, with Brainard, Lynn, Saler, Biederbick,
Ellis, Fredericks, and Connell, dragging an eight-man sledge, weighing,
with load, one thousand pounds. They left sledge and load beyond Cape
Distant, and returned to lodge at the house, where all hands fortified
themselves with a first-class dinner, preparatory to the labors of the
next day.

They got off early, but, owing to the limited light and other
difficulties, found themselves some distance from the snow-house near
Cape Beechy when darkness overtook them. Having all in readiness on the
4th, they again got off, leaving Ellis at the snow-house with an injured
foot. This was unfortunate, as he was a strong, willing fellow, with
lots of pluck. The prospects of crossing the straits at this time were
not encouraging, both from the short duration of light and from the open
waters. Still, they determined to make the effort. This they first did
with the whale-boat, which they had picked up on their route. They
mounted it on the sledge, but soon found they could not drag so heavy a
body, and returned to the snow-house. Rice, whom they found there, was
then sent with a dog-sledge to bring up a small boat from Cape
Murchison. Dr. Pavy, Lieutenant Kislingbury, and Jans coming along _en
route_ for another attempt northward, were surprised to see how
comfortable they were in the snow-house.

After extensive repairs to the small boat, they again got off at noon,
seven men and Lockwood himself dragging the sledge, on which were the
boat and one hundred and fourteen pounds of rations. On reaching open
water, three only were to proceed in the boat, the others to fall back
on the snow-house. They got along pretty well until they came to the
hummocks, through which, with extreme labor, and frequently using an
axe, they made their way, till they heard, in the distance toward
Polaris Promontory, the roar of the grinding ice, indicating open water.
Moving on ahead of the party over very rough ice, and crossing some wet,
slushy ice fifteen or twenty yards wide, Lockwood found himself on a
level floe. He had gone only a short distance over this toward a dark
streak beyond, which he took for open water, when he found that the floe
upon which he stood was in motion. Retreating over the bed of slushy
ice, he found this to be really only a thick mass of broken pieces
intermediate between the moving floe and the firm ice. He could readily
thrust his ice-hook down through it to the water beneath, and did so.
Reaching the sledge-party, and viewing the difficulties of the
situation, he decided, all agreeing, on the impracticability of crossing
at this season. They accordingly displayed signal-torches from the top
of an iceberg, as agreed upon, that Lieutenant Greely might know that
they had found the crossing dangerous and had abandoned the effort. They
returned in darkness, and with considerable difficulty, guided somewhat
by a signal-torch displayed by Ellis at the snow-house. They remained
all day at the snow-house, which the men found so comfortable that they
preferred it to the restraints of the station. At noon Lockwood and
Brainard went upon a tramp, and found the condition of the open water to
be such as to demonstrate the wisdom of their return the evening before.
The men made some additions to the snow-house, which were regarded as a
great success. The return to the station on the 7th was attended with
more difficulty and labor than had been expected, arising from a strong
south wind having worn away the foot-ice, and the small amount of light;
hence, they soon had wet feet, which in that region always means
frost-bitten feet. So much were some of the men used up by this journey
of twenty miles, which had before been made in one day, that they had to
be conveyed on the sledge, and did not reach the station till the third
day. At Dutch Island they met Whistler, who, missing Biederbick at the
ropes and seeing a human form on the sledge, came to the conclusion that
Biederbick was dead, and repeatedly exclaimed, “Poor Biederbick! poor
Biederbick!”

During a period of dullness at the station, Rice and Henry projected a
newspaper, to be called the “Arctic Moon,” and Lockwood, to whom, also,
the idea had occurred, agreed to join them as one of the editors. They
wanted something to dispel the monotony which was depressing all hands,
as all were tired of reading, of cards and other games, while two of
Lockwood’s room-mates were gloomy and taciturn. To counteract this, he
resumed his reading, especially history and travels—anything but novels.
Kane’s work interested him especially, and he considered him a
remarkable man, courageous, energetic, and determined. Their own manner
of life just then reminded Lockwood of a rainy day in the country
intensified. “Yet,” says he, “why not be contented? Books and leisure
afford an opportunity for reading and studying which we may never have
again. We have a warm, comfortable house, plenty of food, and other
things which many are without. Life in this world is just what one
chooses to make it. Man can make of it a heaven or a hell.” He felt
anxious as to the effect of one hundred and thirty sunless days upon
himself and men, as this might tell on their sledging in the coming
spring. Nares’s people broke down under it, and, when sledging, were
decimated by the scurvy. They themselves were fortunate so far in not
having had a single man sick enough to keep his bed.

True to his intellectual instincts, Lockwood formed a class in geography
and grammar, consisting of Ellison, Bender, Connell, and Whistler, while
Lieutenant Greely taught them arithmetic. On the 22d of November
appeared, with a flourish of trumpets, the first number of the “Arctic
Moon.” Of course the editors thought it a great success. It had for the
frontispiece a sketch of the house, drawn by Lockwood, while Rice made
fair copies of the paper by the hectograph process—enough for all, and
many to spare.

These trifles served to shorten, apparently, the many hours of gloom and
darkness, which were wearing away the spirits of all. The men were now
far less hilarious than they had been, and, with the game of chess to
assist, silence reigned supreme.

Thanksgiving-day, with its games, sports, and dinner, gave them a
pleasant variety. First, came the snow-shoe race of one hundred yards,
Brainard, victor. Next, the foot-race, with many contestants, but Ellis
coming out ahead. Then the dog-team race to Dutch Island and return,
under the Esquimaux Jans and Frederick, the latter, victor. And,
finally, a shooting-match, necessarily at short range, and with torches,
Henry, victor. These and other out-door exercises were followed by the
grand feature of the day, the Thanksgiving dinner, and not a poor one
either, even for a lower latitude than eighty-two degrees. In the
evening Lieutenant Greely gave out prizes to the victors and second
best, Rice acting as master of ceremonies, rigged out in swallow-tail
coat, black pantaloons, white vest, and “boiled” shirt. The mercury
froze on that day, and Lieutenant Greely brought in a teacupful, which
looked like lead as it comes from the mold. The moon also made its
appearance, and all fully appreciated the blessing of this luminary.

“What a change,” exclaimed Lockwood, “when she comes forth in all her
beauty and loveliness, flooding the landscape with her refulgent beams
and cheering the drooping spirits of benighted mortals! Even the poor
dogs feel her influence!” On the 1st of December, they had an almost
total eclipse of the moon, more remarkable there than an eclipse of the
sun elsewhere. During the phenomenon, the exposed part of the disk was
of a dull-red color. Lockwood took the altitude of the moon while
crossing the meridian, using a saucer of molasses as an artificial
horizon. She flooded the whole region with a light, electric in
appearance, and causing deep shadows. In the evening they were treated
to a display of mock moons, with a circular band of bright light
connecting them, and several bands or ribbons of light at various
angles, but all passing through the moon.

The Esquimaux, Jans and Frederick, having of late been much depressed,
efforts were made by kindly attentions on the part of Lieutenant Greely
and others to dispel their gloom and assure them of the friendly feeling
entertained toward them by all. These good offices, however, all failed.
Dr. Pavy said this state of mind was not infrequent among the natives of
lower Greenland, and often resulted in the wandering off of the subjects
of it, and, if not followed, by their perishing in the cold. One morning
Jans was missing, and at once his tracks were followed by Dr. Pavy,
Brainard, Rice, and Whistler, with the dog-sledge. Late in the afternoon
they returned with poor Jans, who was found nine miles away, following
at a rapid pace the ice-foot around Cape Murchison. He returned
unwillingly, and gave no reason for his strange conduct. Rice and
Whistler were both rendered _hors de combat_ by the journey, the former
by a fall from an ice-hummock, the latter by congestion of the brain
owing to having shaved before going out. Both Dr. Kane and Dr. Rink (in
his book on Greenland) refer to hallucinations similar to that of Jans,
and the frequent fatal consequences.

On the 14th of December appeared the second number of the “Arctic Moon,”
which was thought to be an improvement on number one, and was well
received. Lieutenant Greely gave a lecture on the “Polar Question.”

On the same day also, Esquimaux Frederick came to Lieutenant Greely and
asked permission to leave the station, and, when asked why, said some
one was going to shoot him—a strange hallucination!

On the 20th Lockwood writes: “The sun now begins his journey to the
north; the backbone of the winter is broken! Walking out at noon to-day,
I was just able to see the hands of my watch by holding it close to my
eye. The profound silence of this region is quite as striking, and
almost as disagreeable, as the darkness. Standing still, one can almost
hear his heart beat. The sense of solitude is sublime.” Speaking of
Arctic literature, he says that “Hayes’ book, though beautifully
written, is far below that of Kane as to information and reliability. No
one who has been up Smith’s Sound can fail to notice this.”

On the 24th of December, after eating a birthday dinner, the Christmas
presents from an unknown friend to every one of the party, were
distributed. The rooms were appropriately decorated, and everything was
done to render the occasion cheerful and pleasant. Those articles not
specifically assigned by the donor were disposed of by lottery.

Lockwood indulged in the following reflections: “How suggestive of home
and of the dear ones there! How often do my thoughts wander away to
them! Has Providence been equally kind to them as to me? The day with me
suggests alternately the past and the future. Will next Christmas find
me here, with everything around as auspicious as now, and shall I then
be able to look back with satisfaction and self-complacency on my labors
along the Greenland coast? Or will the future bring a record of dreams
unsatisfied, of efforts unproductive, of labor in vain? My mind is far
away with that group at home assembled together and doubtless regretting
that the absent one is not of their number. Could I but see them for an
hour, or know that all is well with them, I should rejoice, indeed!”

The “Lime-Juice Club” gave an entertainment on the same evening, at
which Snyder affected Jans to tears by his personation of an Esquimaux
lady, and Connell brought down the house as a martinet captain, by
exclaiming, when a soldier who had shot himself was brought in: “Very
sad affair, very sad, indeed! Charge him with two cartridges expended,
Sergeant.”

Lieutenant Greely also gave the party as a lecture, “Reminiscences of
the Battle of Fredericksburg,” which was interesting and two hours long,
though entirely _ex tempore_; and Lockwood was announced to lecture on
“Arctic Sledging.”

On the 31st, rations of rum were issued to help the men welcome in the
new year. They were also to fire a salute with rifles. Fiddles were in
full blast, with singing and other marks of hilarity.

Lockwood’s lecture on “Arctic Sledging” was given January 3, 1882, and
was well received. Being confirmed in his opinion that he was no public
speaker, he intended to leave lecturing for others thereafter. On the
9th he took his usual walk, notwithstanding the thermometer was at 60°
below zero, and felt the cold chiefly on his nose. It seemed curious to
him, that when the thermometer was lowest, the air was stillest. Were it
otherwise, he supposed existence in the Arctic would be an
impossibility.

But severe as was the weather, it did not deter him from the study of
science, as will be seen by the following record, made on the 9th of
January: “I have been looking up the subject of nautical astronomy for
some time past, and to-day and this evening, taking sextant, mercury,
etc., and establishing an observatory on top of an old barrel in front
of the house, commenced observations on the transit of Markab, Capella,
and other stars, but have not been very successful. Everything conspires
against one in this climate. It reminds me of my observations last
spring. However, I hope by dint of practice to do better. The winter is
passing away slowly but surely. The time is coming when I shall look at
these stars from grassy fields, on a summer night, in the temperate
zone, I hope. The stars up here are very bright, and a great many of
them circle around the pole and never set. It is a beautiful sight.
Arcturus, Aldebaran, and others, besides being very bright, show
different colors, red, violet, and green. Jupiter looks immense.”

Still absorbed with his astronomical studies, he gives us the following
on the 13th of the same month: “The moon appeared after noon. How
welcome she is! How a poet would rave over the moon could he once
experience a polar winter!—not simply an Arctic winter, for anywhere
north of the Arctic Circle is the Arctic, and the dark days which most
expeditions have seen are trifling compared with ours. I think it would
be a good idea to exile a first-class poet into these regions for the
purpose, but give him to understand he was never to return. How he would
sing!”

On the 12th, they had a phenomenon they had never heard of—the
precipitation of vapor with a perfectly clear sky. It resembled a heavy
mist or light rain.

On the 16th occurred the first hurricane of the season. It began in the
morning with heavy south wind and sudden fall of barometer. At noon the
wind whipped round to the northeast and blew with indescribable fury,
filling the air with snow-drifts, and blotting out the view of
everything even a few feet distant. The anemometer registered sixty-five
miles, and then broke down. The noise of the storm, as heard from the
house, was as though on shipboard. It must have given way but for the
ice walls around it.

On the 20th, Lieutenant Greely issued a circular letter, calling
attention to the order that all should be up for breakfast. Kislingbury
and Dr. Pavy took exceptions to this, and the latter declined to lecture
in his turn.

The next evening occurred a beautiful and unique auroral display, the
chief features of which were many broad bands of pure white passing
through the zenith and reaching to the east and to the west horizon,
which blended, twisted, and curled in upon each other in a very
remarkable manner. The spectacle was viewed with wonder and amazement.

On the 26th, the twilight at noonday was quite bright. The moon also
lent her aid; but low spirits and a sense of oppression and homesickness
prevailed, all induced, doubtless, by want of exercise, and loneliness.

“Another twenty-four hours,” wrote Lockwood, on the 6th of February, “of
this interminable night nearly gone! Thank God! Sometimes it seems as if
this life must hold on forever, but _tempus fugit_ up here as well as
elsewhere. The days and weeks seem weeks and months in passing, and yet,
in the retrospect, time seems to have passed quickly, because there is
so little in the past to mark its progress, I suppose.”

Lockwood could not realize the extreme cold, and seldom wore his gloves
when going out for a few minutes. Though he put on a thick dog-skin coat
and seal-skin over-all when taking his daily walk, he really did not
regard so much clothing necessary. Exposure to such low temperatures,
however, for several hours, and particularly at night, was to be
dreaded. Many authorities—among others Lieutenant Greely—spoke of a
peculiar sensation in the throat on first encountering a very low
temperature, as when going out of doors from a warm room, but such was
not Lockwood’s experience. Provided it was calm, he could stand any
degree of cold he had yet met with. Owing to the peculiar and admirable
construction of their house, the men were able to keep up 50° of heat
within, however cold without.

On the 13th of February, Lockwood with two men went to see what damage
had resulted from the late storm to the observatory on the summit of
Bellot Island. Contrary to their expectations, they found the snow not
only deep, but with a crust just firm enough _not_ to bear.
Consequently, they sent the dog-sledge back, and proceeded on foot,
frequently sinking down knee-deep. Though the thermometer stood at -65°,
they got into a profuse perspiration, which was not lessened by the
steep and slippery ascent of two thousand feet. From this point the
station-house seemed only a black spot, and was hardly recognizable as a
house. Having made their inspection and fired their rifles several times
as agreed upon with Lieutenant Greely, who was experimenting on sound,
they returned. The result of these experiments was, that at -65° sound
travels nine hundred and fifty feet per second. This was the coldest day
they had yet experienced, and still they did not suffer with the cold.

The return to a warm house was an indescribable comfort, and Lockwood
thought that if this could always be done, Arctic journeying would then
be nothing. It was unprecedentedly cold even for that latitude. Pure
brandy and also glycerine were frozen hard. The poor dogs suffered, yet
many of them preferred to remain curled up on the snow-banks outside, to
occupying the tent and holes prepared for them.

On the 19th, Lockwood made a dog-sledge trip with Brainard and the
Esquimaux Frederick to Depot “B,” to look for a good place to cross the
straits. Found that the snow had drifted so as to form a continuous
inclined plane from the bluffs far outside the snow-house and tent, thus
almost concealing them. They recognized the spot only by seeing the
stovepipe jutting above the snow. Knowing how the mouth of the tunnel
lay from this point, they dug through the hard, compact snow, cleared
out the tunnel, and soon found themselves within the snow-house. The
little stove was swallowed up in a cone of snow reaching from roof to
floor. This had drifted through a small aperture where the pipe pierced
the roof. The fire going out after they turned in, the room became
extremely damp and chilly. However, they made up for the discomforts of
the night by a rousing fire in the morning, over which they got up a
grand breakfast of musk-ox steak, beans, coffee, and hard-tack. They
next sent the team with Frederick down to St. Patrick’s Bay for a bag of
coal, while Lockwood and Brainard walked over the straits toward Polaris
Promontory. Going out some four or five miles over ice of varied nature,
some exceedingly broken and hummocky and some quite level, they
returned, satisfied that the time for crossing over was not yet.
Frederick had, in the mean time, returned, mended up the hole in the
roof, made a good fire, and prepared a warm meal.

They again started out to test the important passage, taking a route
farther north. There the rubble-ice reached only two hundred yards from
the shore, beyond which, as far as they walked and could see, smooth ice
extended. They returned, satisfied that this was the place to attempt
the passage when the time should arrive for their contemplated
exploration farther north.

They made the trip over the foot-ice to the station (twenty miles) in
four hours, thus proving the fine condition of the sledge and dogs for
traveling, and the eagerness of the dogs to rejoin their companions and
pups. All the way, they had before them to the southward a rich glow on
the horizon like the sunrise of a fine morning at home. They found the
men celebrating the 22d of February by match-games of various kinds,
and, after listening to an appropriate speech on the Father of his
Country, enjoyed a good dinner.




                                   X.
                           “THE ARCTIC MOON.”


As already mentioned in this narrative, among the events which occurred
at the Greely Scientific Colony, or Fort Conger, was the establishment
of a newspaper, the first ever issued so near the north pole, the
nearest approach to it previously having been “The Ice-Blink,” issued by
Kane’s Expedition in 1854. It was projected by G. W. Rice and C. B.
Henry, but Lieutenant Lockwood was the editor-in-chief. The sheet was
fifteen by nineteen inches in size, first prepared in manuscript and
then multiplied by photograph, published on the 2d of November, 1881,
and semi-monthly as to time. As the musk-oxen, the walruses, and the
bears and wolves of Grinnell Land took no interest in the enterprise,
the patrons of the paper were confined to the colony of explorers. In
his opening address, the editor proudly claimed that his corps of
contributors embraced the finest minds in the country; that his
reporters would always be “on the spot”; that the journal was certain to
be superior to any other in the country; and that the subscription list
numbered not less than twenty-five thousand—the last assertion being a
servile imitation of what often appears in the papers of New York and
other American cities. And now, by way of giving the reader an idea of
the style and character of this unique journal, it is proposed to
reproduce in this chapter, as specimens, a collection of its editorials,
contributions, items of news, and advertisements. In an article on
“Christmas,” the editor gives us the following pathetic reflections:

“Our Christmas-time has come and gone, and, although our geographical
position is not a favorable one for the complete observation of this
joyous anniversary, it was attended with many of the happy features that
make its memory a pleasant landmark of the dying year. No boughs of
‘evergreen were berried bright’ (our crop of evergreens failed this
season), but had they existed, the conditions for making them ‘white
with rime’ were very favorable.

“Christmas always attracts a crowd of joyous faces, and, although we
missed the pleasure of ‘childhood’s grace and fair maiden’s blushes’
under the mystic mistletoe, the stalwart, bearded men who grasped hands
under our smoke-begrimed roof felt indeed the inspiration of the
gladsome time when the voice of man’s good-will to man speaks forth in
everything. Could the possessors of the kind hearts and hands that
contributed so much to the pleasure of the party have looked in upon the
happy, smiling faces, living again a day of their youth in the
anticipation and surprise attending the bestowal and opening of the
mysterious packages containing the presents, they would have felt more
than rewarded for their kind thoughtfulness. Lips unused to the task
framed grateful acknowledgments of the kind act. The interest in our
happiness taken by the wife of the commanding officer was repeatedly
shown, and when, as we sat down to our inviting Christmas dinner, we
contemplated a crowning proof of her kind good-will, repressed
enthusiasm could no longer be restrained, and three rousing cheers for
Mrs. Greely were given with an effect which proved beyond cavil the
vigor of our lungs, and rendered unnecessary the weekly examination of
the doctor.

“Of course, the festive season brought with it regrets that would not be
repressed, and longings that could not be satisfied, when processions of
absent loved ones and severed friends followed the funerals of other
Christmas-days through thoughts that would wander over snow, and ice,
and land, and sea, to the happy firesides where we knew they were
gathered. But every one looked on the bright side of things, and
extracted as much comfort and pleasure as possible under the
circumstances; we even knew one sordid individual who congratulated
himself on the immunity of his exchequer from the heavy drafts generally
entailed by the purchase of Christmas presents. We have not space to
enter into a detailed account of all the happy features of the holiday.
Altogether, our Christmas was a great success.”

By way of showing that there was nothing very frigid in the hearts of
the explorers, another editorial is submitted, on the New Year:

“Christmas is gone, with all its pleasant associations, and we find
ourselves on the threshold of a new year. What thoughts the day recalls
to a reflective mind! the exodus of the old, the advent of the new year;
the past and the future, history and prophecy, the ceaseless alternation
of life and death, the eternity of nature.

“The day is suggestive in another way. Where were we a year ago? what
doing? what looking forward to? Where shall we be a year from now? what
will be our surroundings, and what shall we look back upon? How distant
seemed this day a year ago! how short now seems the time that has since
elapsed!

“The new year of 1882 finds us a community of twenty-five men, living
through the cold and darkness of an Arctic winter, in a small house near
the north pole, thousands of miles beyond any civilized habitation. A
year ago saw us scattered—some in the cities, some on the plains of the
far West, some occupied in quiet routine, some in the ceaseless changes
and activity of the field. Will the next year find us here with our
surroundings as satisfactory and auspicious? We trust so, and this day
is eminently a day for making good resolutions. We are free agents, and
the future depends, in great part, on ourselves. Let us, then, determine
that, so far as lies within our power, we shall have no cause to look
back with regret on the year just ushered in. The phrase is hackneyed,
but none the less true:

  ‘Of all sad words of tongue or pen,
  The saddest are these—it might have been.’”

And now we come to a contribution addressed to the editor of the “Arctic
Moon,” as follows:

“As Grinnell Land is a recognized Territory of the United States, and
has a territorial form of government, a delegate from this Territory is
to be elected who is to take his seat at the opening of the
Forty-seventh Congress. The undersigned offers himself as a candidate
for the office, on the following platform: I am in favor of reaching the
north pole by balloon, a liberal appropriation for the purchase of
lime-juice, compulsory education, unlimited emigration, a homestead and
sixty acres of land, one musk-ox and two Esquimaux dogs to each actual
settler. I am also a strong advocate of woman’s rights, but there is no
good in rights without the woman. I am prepared to ‘chaw’ the points on
the above platform; I think it is ‘plump,’ and will stand without being
propped up.

                                              (Signed)    “Connell.”

And now, under the general heading of “_Moon-Beams_,” we come to the
following paragraphs, which are not only spicy, but characteristic
of the time and place with which they are identified:

“The British expedition found the ice in this harbor, January 1,
1876, twenty-eight and three-quarter inches thick. Measurements made
this day showed thirty-four inches. Our average temperature for
December was nearly eight degrees lower than theirs for the same
month.

“The darkest day being a thing of the past, we shall soon find
ourselves sliding down hill quite rapidly. We have made complete
arrangements to have the sun interviewed on his return to this
country the latter part of February.

“The walrus seem to have emigrated, so that the Dutch Island people
now take their daily exercise in _peas_.

“‘I wonder what is in the mess-boxes?’ is the oft-repeated query.
Have patience, brethren, time will show.

“Old Probabilities will be surprised to learn, that his enterprising
colony at this point is indulging in outdoor sports with the
thermometer at 40° below zero.

“To-day, at Dutch Island, Lieutenant Kislingbury was able to see the
time of day holding his watch about one foot from his face.

“Sergeant Cross has made another addition to his already numerous
trades—that of bottling samples of air for the examination and
scrutiny of those not favored with a sniff of Arctic breezes.

“Sergeant Brainard is excellent authority for the statement that the
gate-money taken at the racing contest will be devoted to the
advancement of geographical knowledge within the Arctic Circle. Such
being the case, the number of aborigines present will be a crucial
test of the desire on the part of the Grinnellites to bring their
country into more general knowledge.

“Wanted—A good family horse. Will buy it cheap, or will take for his
keeping, or keep for his taking. To be used on good country roads
and for family driving. Must be very gentle. No objections to a
Government mule. Address Jacob Doboy.

“Wanted—A poet for the ‘Arctic Moon.’ Must be strictly temperate and
a good speech-maker. No tailors need apply. Address this office.

“Wanted—A humoristic writer for the ‘Arctic Moon.’ The present
incumbent has suddenly become ill from too close application.

“Information wanted of the Greely Arctic Expedition. It strayed away
from home last July, and was last heard from at Upernavik,
Greenland.

“We beg leave to announce to the public that we have made extensive
improvements in our establishment, whereby we can furnish at the
shortest notice bread, twists, rolls, cakes, pies, tarts, and, in
fact, anything in the baker’s line. Wedding cakes made a specialty.
Are thankful for past patronage, and respectfully ask its
continuance in future.

                                                “Frederick Shootman,
                                             “San Francisco Longman,
                                                  “Merchant Bakers.”




                                XI.
                   EXPEDITION TO LOCKWOOD ISLAND.


On the 29th of February, Lieutenant Lockwood went upon an
experimental trip to Thank God Harbor preparatory to his proposed
grand expedition along the coast of Northern Greenland. His
companions were Brainard, Jewell, Long, and the Esquimaux, Frederick
and Jans, with two dog-teams. As the dogs, constantly yelping and
howling, competed for the mastery, they traveled rapidly, and, after
many twistings and turnings, reached their destination, where they
found the observatory still standing. They took a necessary
inventory, and, after a survey of the dismal plain, visited the
grave of C. F. Hall, where Lieutenant Lockwood recorded the
following touching notice in his journal: “The head-board erected by
his comrades, as also the metallic one left by the English, still
stands. How mournful to me the scene, made more so by the howling of
the winds and the thick atmosphere! It was doubtless best that he
died where he did. I have come to regard him as a visionary and an
enthusiast, who was indebted more to fortune than to those practical
abilities which Kane possessed. Yet he gave his life to the cause,
and that must always go far toward redeeming the short-comings of
any man. The concluding lines of the inscription on the English
tablet, I think good: ‘To Captain Hall, who sacrificed his life in
the advancement of science, November 8, 1871. This tablet has been
erected by the British Polar Expedition of 1875, which followed in
his footsteps and profited by his experience.’”

The American inscription on the wooden headboard was as follows:

                            IN MEMORY OF
                       CHARLES FRANCIS HALL,
               LATE COMMANDER U. S. STEAMER POLARIS,
                       NORTH POLE EXPEDITION.
                      _Died November 8, 1871._

“I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me, though
he were dead, yet shall he live.”

After various struggles with the snow, fog, and cold weather, ending
in frosted feet and faces, and after inspecting a boat left by
Buddington, they returned by way of the snow-house at Cape Beechy,
and, all very much exhausted, reached the station, receiving a
hearty welcome. Greely had been very anxious about the party, owing
to a storm of great violence, and had sent Dr. Pavy with men to
their relief. The trip thus made covered not less than one hundred
and forty miles. Lockwood now decided that on the 1st of April he
would start upon his proposed expedition. This trip occupied his
mind continually. He hoped he might be successful, yet there were
many chances of failure. Who could divine the future? He felt that
he ought to be able to reach Cape Britannia, but that was not
enough; he desired to do more.

As the time for taking his departure approached, Lockwood was
greatly troubled with rheumatism, but still was very busy in
maturing his plans. Lieutenant Greely wrote him a flattering letter,
putting the whole plan of operations in his hands and placing at his
disposal the entire _personnel_ and material of the expedition. This
would include almost all who could take the field. The men were
becoming enthusiastic and were showing an admirable spirit, although
they knew from experience that they were to engage in no child’s
play. Almost all of those selected had shown pluck hitherto. Without
this element no one could endure the hardships that they might have
to undergo. Should any of those selected break down early, there
were excellent substitutes among those left behind. Lockwood was
pleased with an exhibition of pluck by Ellis, who walked all the way
from Depot “A” with a frozen foot, refusing the offer of Jewell to
bring him on the dog-sledge. Jewell, on returning from Lincoln Bay,
had orders to convey stores to the “Gap,” where the boat previously
sent over the strait lay. Hence, before starting, supplies would be
placed at Depot “B,” at the “Gap,” and at a point intermediate on
the frozen strait.

Having all things complete, Sergeant Brainard was to proceed at once
with the supporting parties to Cape Sumner. He was to leave Depot
“B” with a weight to drag of one hundred and thirty pounds per man.
Lockwood was to follow with dog-sledge loaded with five hundred
pounds of pemmican. Thus they would concentrate at Cape Sumner with
the six hundred rations in hand, together with seven hundred pounds
of dog pemmican. The stores embraced pemmican, bacon, corned beef,
roast musk-ox, raw musk-ox, English beef, hard bread, canned beans,
potatoes, sugar, tea, chocolate, and coffee, besides which they
carried alcohol for cooking and lime-juice as an anti-scorbutic.
Their sledge ration had been made up by consultation with Lieutenant
Greely, though, of course, it might be departed from if
circumstances required. The diet list was purposely a varied one. No
rum or spirits were taken except as a medicine. The main supporting
party consisted of Sergeant Lynn, Corporal Ellison, and privates
Biederbick, Whistler, and Henry.

Lieutenant Lockwood, Sergeant Jewell, and the Esquimaux Frederick
formed the advance party, while Sergeants Brainard and Ralston,
Corporal Saler, and privates Connell, Fredericks, and one other man
constituted the second supporting party.

[Illustration: Sledging over the Arctic Floe.]

On the 2d of April, the main and second supporting parties moved off
in good style, amid the waving of flags, firing of pistols, cheers,
and other demonstrations. Both Lieutenants Greely and Lockwood took
occasion to address the men a few words of encouragement and advice.
Lockwood confined his remarks to the necessity of co-operation and
subordination as the chief essentials to success. He would follow
with Jewell and the dog-sledge, and, if he knew himself, would not
return unsuccessful. He got off at 8 P. M., with Jewell, Frederick,
and the dog-sledge Antoinette. The team of eight consisted of
“Ritenbank, the king,” a large white dog, at whose growl all the
rest trembled; “Major,” a friend of Ritenbank, and a very useful,
good-natured old fellow, hard-working and quiet, without any special
characteristics; “Howler,” a large, lean, mean, ill-natured brute,
whom they took on board at Disco, and who lorded it over the rest
till Ritenbank came on board at the place of the same name, when
Howler was dethroned; since which he had been morose and
misanthropic, and never associated with the other dogs. He set up
the most unearthly howling whenever any other dog approached him,
especially if that other dog had designs on something he was engaged
in eating or trying to eat—a tin can, for instance. At the end of a
march, when the pemmican was being cut up, and he, with the rest,
was awaiting his opportunity to make a general rush, his howling
became almost unendurable. But he was especially despicable, because
he allowed any and every dog of the team to jump on and bite him.
His only redeeming trait was his earnestness in pulling, for, when
the sledge stuck in deep snow or rubble-ice, he was the last of the
dogs to sit on his haunches and look while _you_ got it out. On
several occasions when Ritenbank was making efforts to get inside
the tent and steal the meat while all were asleep, Howler had given
the alarm by his unearthly howling. His place in the team was on the
right flank, and he kept it all the time, never dropping back and
coming up in the wrong place, as did the other dogs. Next to Howler
was the “Woolly dog,” a dirty-looking cur with long white hair,
which made Howler’s life a burden all the time by snapping at him as
he hauled by his side. Next came the “kooneys,” signifying in
Esquimaux mother-dogs. They were called “Black Kooney” and “White
Kooney,” and were both good workers. Then came “Ask-him,” a pup when
brought on board in Greenland, but now _of age_, and bearing the
airs of a veteran. He brooked insult from no dog but Ritenbank, and
evidently bided his time to contest the throne with him. He had even
taken upon himself the kingly custom of biting the adjoining dog
whenever he felt the whip. On his left were two dogs already named,
“Major” and the “Boss.” On the left flank was “Gypsy,” a little fat
kooney dog which pulled only under the lash, and yet by foraging and
stealing managed to get twice the rations of any of the rest, and
was always plump and fat.

The advance party reached Depot “A” in good time, and took on five
sacks (five hundred pounds) of dog pemmican and some cans of corned
beef, which made their load very heavy.

On the 5th of April, Lockwood reached the snow-house, and there
found Brainard and the rest, making thirteen altogether. They
completely filled the house, and also the dug-out in the snow-bank
adjoining, so that Lockwood and Jewell moved the provisions out of
the tent, and slept there, and Frederick in the tunnel. The tent
being snowed in to the ridge-pole, and connected with the tunnel,
they were quite comfortable. On the same day they saw an eagle on a
floe-berg, which was considered a good omen. After needed rest all
hands took their departure. The snow on the ice-floe was somewhat
deep, and the loads very heavy. The route across the straits,
previously determined on, was from Cape Beechy to within five or six
miles of the east shore, and then as direct as possible to Cape
Sumner. On reaching the tent on the straits, about four and one half
miles out, Lockwood dropped his load, and went back to look after
the sledges, then out of sight. He found Whistler sick and unable to
pull, and Biederbick and Connell trying to pull the load without
him—not an encouraging commencement of a long journey. Aided by the
dog-sledge, all soon reached the tent and camped for the night.
Lockwood, Jewell, and Frederick slept in the wall-tent, pitched
there some weeks before. Lockwood writes at this point: “Finding it
very cold, I was glad to get up and out, leaving Jewell to the
unhappy work of getting breakfast. (Breakfast! what a misnomer in
such cases!) I then went to the two tents occupied by the others to
inquire for healths. Mr. Henry, correspondent of the ‘Chicago Times’
(as he called himself), the same who had written on the side of a
large iceberg, ‘Ho! for Cape Britannia,’ said he could go no
farther, as he had been suffering dreadfully all night with
rheumatism; or, if he did go farther, we would have to haul him
back, while from here he thought he could manage to hobble by
himself to the snow-house, and, after resting there and again at
Depot ‘A,’ reach the station. Henry is a big fellow, over six feet
in height, with apparently the strength and physique of Hercules. It
was a bad omen for the rest of us when _he_ broke down. Connell had
frozen his feet the previous day quite badly, and only discovered
the extent of the injury after getting into camp, but thought _he_
could go on, or at least was determined to try. All hands looked
very forlorn, but generally were resolute and determined. Finally,
Jewell had the tea and canned meat warmed sufficiently, and we
stuffed ourselves with all there was to stuff, and prepared to
follow the others who had already started. We overtook Fredericks
(the saddler) struggling along in the snow with a sledge all by
himself. He was a dwarf by the side of the giant Henry. It was
necessary to do something, and so I told Jewell he must join
Fredericks, and leave the Esquimaux and me to manage the dog-sledge.
I overtook the main party about a mile and a half from camp, doing
their best. Connell could hardly walk at all, and it was utterly
impossible for him to pull. He was very reluctant to go back, but
there was no alternative; so, throwing off the load, I took him on
the dog-sledge as far as Cape Beechy, whence he thought he could get
along by himself. On returning I picked up the load, and proceeded
to follow the trail of the others. The snow soon became worse, and
the sledge so often stuck that I determined to double up—take half
the load at a time. The Esquimaux dogs can pull a very heavy load,
and through bad places, but the moment the sledge comes to a dead
halt they sit on their haunches, turn complacently round, and wait
till the sledge is extricated. If not fully started, they will pull
at random, or not at all. On these occasions the hard work comes
upon the driver and others with the sledge.”

On the 7th, they joined the other wing of the expedition, finding
them in camp some miles south-west of the gap. The wind had been
blowing and snow drifting for some hours, and everything indicated a
storm. Lockwood and Frederick pitched tent and went into camp, first
bringing up the rest of the load.

While the storm was still raging, they got off with half the load,
leaving the rest making preparations for a move, and took a course
for Cape Sumner, whose steep, rocky face loomed up in the distance,
terminated by a line of magnificent cliffs, which extended unbroken,
except by “the Gap,” as far south as Cape Lupton of Polaris fame.
They traveled upon level floes interrupted by ridges of hummocky
ice, over which they had to get the sledge as best they could, and
with frequent use of the axe. The wind blowing stronger, and the air
being obscured with driving snow, they could with difficulty pick
their way. Traveling over the straits was like navigating a ship in
a tortuous channel. They soon found themselves in the midst of a
mass of rubble-ice of the worst description; gaps and chasms between
the crags and blocks of ice, often filled with loose snow, or
entirely obscured by that flying through the air. They could barely
see the cliffs on their right, and could not recognize their
position. The dogs became very much discouraged, Frederick also, and
Lockwood himself felt in no very enviable frame of mind. After many
ineffectual efforts, and unloading and reloading repeatedly, they
left the load and attempted to explore a route to shore. Not
succeeding, they hunted for some suitable snow-drift in which to
burrow, and there await better weather; but saw none. Finally, the
storm letting up for a moment, they found a level floe, and, with
the use of the axe, Lockwood and Frederick got the sledge upon it.

On the 8th, at 3 A. M., they arrived at Cape Sumner, and, getting
through the rubble-ice near the shore, gained the steep snow-slope
which lay between the foot of the cliffs and the line of immense
floe-bergs along the shore, stranded and pressed close up to the
snow-slope. Between the bergs and the slope, the wind had made great
gaps, deep and tortuous. The only way to get along was either
through these gaps—often like pits—or to take the slope above and
run the risk of tumbling down into them, sledge and all, sometimes
fifteen or twenty feet. There was often no alternative but the
latter. Lockwood expected to find it calm there by reason of the
protection of the bluffs, but, on the contrary, the wind came down
from above in gusts and whirlwinds, filling the air with eddying
columns of snow. When about a mile from the Polaris Boat Camp, they
encountered an immense mass of snow entirely filling up the ravine
from top to bottom. Leaving the sledge, Lockwood went on to see if
he could reach the Boat Camp, but could hardly keep his feet on
account of the wind. Returning, he and Frederick made a small hole
in the side of a large drift, and, pulling in everything the dogs
could possibly eat, prepared to “weather the storm.” By 9 A. M.,
_supper_ had been eaten in darkness, for they had no candles, and
Frederick, wedged close up to him in the frozen sleeping-bag, was
snorting away like a steam-engine. Lockwood soon fell asleep too,
but woke up to find the sleeping-bag and his footgear and clothes
wet with the moisture such close quarters produced. Everything
inside was thawing. Soon after, masses of snow falling down through
a number of rents in the side and roof of the excavation, he began
to think they would be smothered alive. But while thinking about it,
he went to sleep again, leaving Frederick snorting as before. Just
how long they slept in that snow-bank, they did not know, but when
they did wake up and try to emerge, they found themselves completely
snowed in, and only got out by vigorous use of their knives, so hard
and compact had the ice and snow become. Frederick being able to
understand only signs and a very few words chiefly referring to
food, their conversation was very limited.

They found the dogs and sledge almost buried in snow. Hastily
harnessing up, they reached the Boat Camp on Newman’s Bay at noon.
Here they again went into camp by digging into a snow-bank and
covering the hole with the tent. “Skaffer,” or eating, being first
in order, they supplied themselves by thawing their prepared roast.
Then they had a smoke—that great solace of the traveler in every
clime. Snow-houses and snow-holes, they concluded, have many
objections, but they always have the merit of being warm. Feeling
uneasy about Brainard and his party, imagining all manner of things
about them, at 9 P. M., Lockwood left everything behind and went
forth with dogs and sledge to hunt them up, and at midnight met them
valiantly struggling along toward the Boat Camp. They had found
shelter from the storm behind a large, friendly floe-berg, where the
tent could stand. On the 10th, preceding them, he picked up the bags
of pemmican he had put off, and returned to Boat Camp, where they
came also and burrowed in the snow. All thus found themselves at
their first station. Jewell, being originally of the party of the
dog-sledge, lodged and fed with them when together, he sleeping in a
single bag, and Lockwood and Frederick together. “It was,” Lockwood
remarks, “a choice of evils which to prefer—Frederick groaning like
a piece of machinery, or Jewell always getting the stockings and
wraps mixed up, and invariably laying hold of the dry ones as his
own.”

“Snow-holes,” he again says, “having the insuperable objection of
asphyxiation, we repaired the tents and returned to
civilization—that is, went really into camp. Whistler and Bender
were found completely done up this morning both in flesh and
spirits—all kinds of pains, shortness of breath, spitting of blood,
faintness. Not being enthusiastic about going farther, I deemed it
best to send them back, and they left at once for the station.”

They now had several things to look to before going farther—to bring
up the rations sent across to the Gap, also to bring over those left
at the tent on the straits.

At midnight, Brainard and party, with three Hudson Bay sledges,
started on this work, and Lockwood left two hours after, with a
dog-sledge and Frederick, for the same purpose. Taking advantage of
smooth ice, interrupted now and then outside the pack near shore, he
soon overhauled Brainard, and they reached the Gap together. There
they found the boat, which had been sent over with so much labor, a
complete wreck. They, however, placed it out of reach of further
damage, as it might yet become important to them. They then went
into camp by going into a snow-burrow prepared there some weeks
before when the boat had been brought over, and proceeded to have a
feast, which possessed at least one merit, that of being _enough_,
for Lockwood did not deem it necessary to adhere strictly to sledge
rations till they had left their base of supplies. Leaving the
others to load up and return to Boat Camp, he and Frederick left
with the dog-sledge for the food put out on the straits _en route_.
Part of this they took up and then joined the others at Boat Camp,
men and dogs well spent and tired; but a good meal, a good smoke,
and a snooze in their bags, set them all right.

Their number was now reduced to nine, two having been sent back soon
after leaving the snow-house (Depot “B”), and two from Boat Camp.
The Hudson Bay sledges were much worn, and likely to become useless.
Lockwood now determined to return to the main station for new
runners, leaving the men under Brainard to bring up the supplies
still out, and otherwise make ready for the advance. The round trip
would be one hundred miles, and would add much to the labor of the
dogs, but there was no help for it, as he could take no chances on
the threshold of the long journey before them.

Soon after making this resolve, he and Frederick got off with their
team, carrying nothing but an axe and half a pound of tobacco. The
dogs were in fine condition, notwithstanding their recent hard work.
True, they supplemented their rations and thus added to their
strength by stealing thirty-five pounds of bacon! “It is wonderful,”
Lockwood here remarks, “what these Esquimaux dogs can do. This team,
which was regarded as a scrub affair—Dr. Pavy having had his pick of
dogs—hauled ice all through the winter, made a trip beyond Cape
Beechy in February, another to Thank-God-Harbor and Newman’s Bay in
March, and then hauled a load to Lincoln Bay and four days after
started on this present trip; yet now they travel along as lively as
ever—so lively that the driver finds it difficult to keep up.”

They duly reached the station, and, of course, Greely and all were
surprised to see them, probably taking them for another cargo of
cripples. After a good sleep and a feast, they were off on their
return at 10 P. M. of the 14th. They took on the runners, a feed of
walrus-meat, a few other trifles, and also a heliograph, the last to
open communication in case of delay or disaster. Stopping six hours
at the snow-house to rest and feed, they started across the strait
with a small load of meat, and, notwithstanding some rubble-ice
which delayed them, reached the Boat Camp at 5.30 P. M., very tired
and very sleepy, too, having accomplished this remarkable journey of
one hundred miles in fifty-four hours. During their absence,
Brainard had brought in everything, and all was ready for the
advance as soon as they could repair the sledges.

After repairing and rebuilding, they had for the trip:

1. Dog-sledge, Lieutenant Lockwood and Esquimaux Frederick; total
weight, 743 pounds.

2. Large sledge (the “Nares”), drawn by Sergeants Brainard and
Ralston and Corporal Saler; estimated total weight, 651 pounds.

3. Hudson Bay sledge (“Hall”), drawn by Sergeant Jewell and private
Fredericks; estimated total weight, 300 pounds.

4. Hudson Bay sledge (“Hayes”), drawn by Sergeant Lynn and Corporal
Ellison; estimated total weight, 300 pounds.

Of this weight, 225 pounds was of equipments, independent of weight
of sledges, and 900 pounds, of food for men and dogs.

At 10.30 P. M., they left the Boat Camp and crossed Newman’s Bay, to
a ravine, or narrow valley, directly opposite, which the lieutenant
called Gorge Creek after finding it was not the route he had taken
it for—that of Beaumont’s return. The others being far behind, he
left the sledge and proceeded on alone to explore. Passing through a
narrow gap, the valley widened out as before, in some places the
exposed stones offering a serious obstacle to heavily laden sledges.
Returning, he and Frederick went back with the team and assisted in
bringing up the foot-sledges. Then, after an advance of ten miles in
eight hours, all went into camp again. Leaving the camp at 10 P. M.,
and doubling up from the start, they made their way up the valley,
through the gap, and to the head of the valley beyond. They found
the exposed stones so annoying that Lockwood regretted often he had
not taken the route round Cape Brevoort, notwithstanding the
rubble-ice. Though Lockwood felt confident he had reached the
divide, yet, throwing off the load, he sent Frederick with the team
back to assist the others, while he went ahead to further
reconnoitre. Although he ascended a high hill, he could see little
encouraging beyond. He returned to the load and continued
down-stream until he met the others painfully advancing, when all
went into camp, after making an advance of six miles in eight hours.

Got off again with half-load at 10 P. M. Preceding the others,
Lockwood and Frederick made their way over slightly undulating
plains, keeping as far as possible northward until they came to a
decided depression in that direction, sometimes following blind
leads, and then returning and continuing on their former way.
Lockwood finally saw before him the crest of the bluff of a
water-course, gaining which he found to his joy a stream running
north, which he entered. Though filled with snow, it afforded good
traveling for the dog team. Continuing down this stream, he passed
between two large masses of rock like a gateway. Here was a regular
cañon as straight as a street and nearly level, whose sides were
almost perpendicular and extremely picturesque. Seeing no signs of
the sea, he resolved to camp here. To this end, throwing off the
half load, he went back for that left behind, expecting to meet the
foot-sledges on the way. Disappointed in this, he returned to the
ravine, and at 6 P. M. he and Frederick were into their
sleeping-bags, feeling much uneasiness about their route, for they
had already traveled a much greater distance than the English maps
called for as lying between Newman’s Bay and the north coast.

Although the men with the drag-sledges had not come up, Lockwood
resolved to leave everything behind and go ahead down the cañon with
the empty sledge till assured that he was _en route_ to the sea by
finding the sea itself. Carrying out this resolve at 10 A. M., the
cañon soon widened into a valley, with deep, soft snow-bed or
stones, and inclosed by lofty mountains. He crossed this, and came
to a gorge like a railroad-cutting, through which the stream ran.
Ascending an adjacent hill, before him lay what seemed an extended
plain, which he recognized as the sea, from a line of floe-bergs
marking the coast.

Just where they were, he did not know, nor did he find out till
their return. The sea had been found, so now they were to find and
bring up the men and sledges. Lockwood and Frederick, with the
wearied team, rapidly went back and happily found the absent ones,
safely, if not comfortably, camped alongside their load.

All broke camp at 7 P. M. and proceeded to bring up such of the
impedimenta as had been left behind; after which they made their way
with great labor through the cañon, valley, and gorge to the sea,
reaching there, at 4 A. M. of the 22d, with everything except a
seal-skin mit, which got adrift and went flying before the wind over
the hills like a bird; for a terrific snow-storm was then raging.
They found great difficulty in making the tents stand, and, indeed,
abandoned the attempt except as to one, into which they all huddled
to weather out the storm. The cooking was confined to making a
little tepid tea. They remained in their bags, sleeping at
intervals, and even going without food and water rather than venture
out.

Finally, on the morning of the 23d, the storm had abated, and they
ventured out, to find that the dogs had taken advantage of the
circumstances to eat up twenty pounds of bacon and twelve pounds of
beef, although these had been secured, as was supposed, at the
bottom of a sledge. They had also eaten a seal-skin mitten. After
some repairs to the sledges, which had suffered by the stony route
passed over, they proceeded on their way along the coast, keeping on
the ice-foot which here ran along a low, sloping shore backed by a
range of hills. At Drift Point, the snow formed steep slopes,
extending from the bluffs (now near the sea) to the tops of the line
of floe-bergs along shore. There, the sledge “Nares” breaking down,
it was necessary to abandon it and increase the loads on the other
sledges, carrying along the good parts of the “Nares” to repair the
others when needful. Doubling up, they made their way along those
steep slopes until near Black Horn Cliffs. Here the slopes became so
abrupt that they were driven on to the rubble-ice near the shore. So
difficult was their way over this with the heavily loaded sledges,
that in many places by standing pulls only could progress be made.
Near these cliffs they went into camp after bringing up the
half-loads left behind, having advanced five miles in eight and a
half hours. Leaving half their stuff, they then made their way over
the rubble-ice, frequently using the axe, till they came to the end
of the cliffs, when the sledges went back for the rest of the stuff,
while Lockwood looked for a more practicable route. Off shore, half
a mile seaward, he found a fair route, following which he reached
Cape Stanton. He thought Stanton Gorge, where Beaumont had left
forty rations, to be near. These, however, he failed to find. After
taking a short nap in the lee of a hummock, he returned to find
Frederick and the dog-sledge. The others coming up, all went into
camp fully tired out, for, besides the roughness of the ice, they
had encountered a stiff wind. Two ptarmigans were seen near Cape
Stanton.

On the 25th of April Frederick declined breakfast—evidence of
something wrong with him. Lockwood, therefore, resolved to go up to
a gorge he had seen the previous day, and there go into camp and lie
over a day. Frederick could hardly walk, and hence rode when it was
possible. Finding a snow-slope inside the hummocks, they made good
progress and reached “Gorge Rest” in one hour. In the mean while the
sun came out, and the air became calm and warm, affording a good
opportunity for drying wet clothes and bags. Lockwood gave a drink
of brandy to Frederick, and then displayed Mrs. Greely’s silk flag,
as they had now attained a point higher than any American had before
reached. In the afternoon, Jewell and Ralston succeeded in finding
Beaumont’s _cache_ farther on, and, as proof of their discovery,
brought back a can of rum marked “Bloodhound,” the name of his
sledge. It was about there that his first man was sent back with the
scurvy. Afterward, when all but two had the disease, they had to go
on or die in the traces.

On the 26th, Frederick was well, otherwise he would have been sent
back. They built a _cache_ and left one day’s ration for men and
dogs; also, to lighten load, snow-shoes, head and foot gear,
blankets, indeed everything they could do without. They reached
Stanton Gorge, dropped load, and Frederick was sent back with the
team for the rest of their stuff. The men came in without doubling,
having also found Beaumont’s _cache_ on a high hill. They all agreed
that such unnecessary labor was enough to bring on the scurvy. They
found there fifty-six pounds of pemmican, ten pounds of bacon, and a
large box containing bread, potatoes, chocolate, tea, sugar,
onion-powder, and stearine used for fuel, all of which were taken on
to Cape Bryant. Beyond this point, to Cape Stanton, their route lay
along the foot of steep snow-slopes beneath the cliffs, with lines
of floe-bergs and hummocks outside, and was exceedingly rough.
Lockwood and Frederick, after crossing Hand Bay, passed the men
moving slowly and laboriously. Their troubles were increased by
frequent upsettings of the sledges along the slope and by the
friction of the splintered bottoms owing to the runners cutting
through.

It was not till 8 P. M. that they all reached Frankfield Bay, and,
thoroughly tired out, went into camp, after an advance of nine miles
in thirteen hours.

Here they cached one day’s rations for all, and then traveled along
the low shore which skirted the base of Mount Lowe, and came upon
the snow-covered surface of Frankfield Bay, a small and pretty
harbor surrounded by steep mountains. Beyond this bay, they crossed
a spit of land, going up a steep slope, and down another equally
steep at a run. There they threw off a half load and went back for
the rest. Afterward all proceeded with half-loads, Lockwood taking
his post at the traces and pulling with the men. After a while he
dropped off to help Frederick, while the men went on to Cape Bryant.
Taking advantage of an interval of leisure, he got out the lamp and
made just two pint-cups of tea for Frederick and himself. “Of all
the occasions,” he says, “when a draught of tea tasted particularly
good, none like this lingers in my memory. Though without milk and
with very little sugar, it tasted like nectar. In fact, as the gods
never undertook any Arctic sledge-journeys, their nectar was not
half so delicious.”

On the 27th, Lockwood shot five ptarmigans or Arctic quails. Sitting
on a floe-berg, they were scarcely distinguishable from the snow.
The traveling on that day was on the whole fair; yet so heavily were
the sledges loaded, and so much worn, that when, after making
fifteen miles in twelve hours, they reached Cape Bryant at 8.30 P.
M., both men and dogs were nearly exhausted. To add to their
joylessness, they had to be very sparing of their rations.
Cracker-dust was with them the grand panacea for short rations. This
went into every stew, was mixed with their tea, and was even taken
alone, and found to be very _filling_. By its aid, they persuaded
themselves that the short allowance was a hearty repast.

On the 28th, Brainard and others made an unsuccessful search for a
_cache_ left there by Beaumont, but got a good view of Cape
Britannia from a high cliff. Lockwood and Jewell also saw it from a
height back of the camp. Beaumont had seen Cape Britannia, but never
reached it. He got only thirty miles farther than Cape Bryant; that
is, to the opposite side of the fiord which here appears, and which
they called “Beaumont’s Fiord.” While Frederick brought up some
stores left behind, Lockwood busied himself with many details
connected with his further advance toward the north, for now his
supports were to leave him and return to the Boat Camp, while
Brainard, Frederick, and himself, with the dog-sledge, were to
proceed alone.

Lockwood now satisfied himself by a careful inspection of the
sledges that the supporting party could go no farther, especially as
some of the men were suffering with snow-blindness. He therefore
broke up one of the sledges, and with it repaired the remaining
drag-sledge and the dog-sledge. Brainard, also suffering with
snow-blindness, remained in the tent, while Lockwood with the others
built a _cache_ and deposited therein the Beaumont stores and such
others as they could not take on. Food for the return party to Boat
Camp having been dropped _en route_, he decided to take with him
twenty-five days’ rations. Hence their advance must be limited to
the time these rations would feed them, going northeast and
returning to Cape Bryant.

He started, therefore, with—

  Men-rations, weighing            230  pounds.
  Dog-pemmican, weighing           300     ”
  Equipments, weighing             176     ”
  Dog-sledge, weighing              80     ”
     Total                         786     ”

or about 98 pounds to each dog.


The weather, though cold, causing some frost-bites, had been
beautiful during their stay here. The men had done their parts well,
and had endured uncomplainingly much hard work, hardship, and
exposure. The supporting party left at 4 P. M., after hearty
hand-shaking and wishing good luck to Lockwood, Brainard, and
Frederick, leaving the three lonely and depressed on that desolate
shore.

And now, as the returning party disappeared in the distance, the
explorers turned toward Cape Britannia. Although they started with a
very heavy load, yet the traveling was fine, and, all three pushing,
they made rapid progress, having Cape May directly ahead and across
the fiord. The dogs seemed to object to going over the sea, and kept
deflecting constantly to the right, the only difficulty arising from
the deepening of the snow and its becoming soft. When they got
stuck, Brainard would pull at the traces, while Lockwood would push
at the upstand, and Frederick divide his energies between helping
them and inducing the dogs to do so.

At 1 A. M. on April 30th, they camped on the fiord, well satisfied
with their advance of sixteen miles in eight hours without once
doubling.

Moving off at 5 P. M. with full load, they had not gone far before
they were forced to throw off half of it, and soon with this half
they found it difficult to get along, for the sledge would sink down
to the slats and the men to their knees through the deep, soft snow.
Lockwood could fully appreciate poor Brainard’s efforts and labors
in a fiord at the southwest, when he crawled through snow
waist-deep, and on hands and knees, for two hundred yards. At 9 P.
M. they came to hummocks, pitched tent, threw off load, and, while
Lockwood prepared supper, the others went back with the team to
bring up what they had thrown off. They had to adhere strictly to
the allowance, for they had rations for just so many days. They had
advanced six miles in seven hours and three quarters.

They started again the next morning with full load, but soon had to
pitch off again. Had better traveling, on the whole, than on the
previous day, though meeting with ranges of old floes and hummocks
filled in with snow. Shortly after midnight, they came abreast Cape
May, the desire of Beaumont, but which, with his crew broken down
with scurvy, and with heavy sledges loaded down with all kinds of
equipments, he never attained. The party pitched tent near an
immense floe extending as far back as the eye could reach. Brainard
and Frederick went back for the dismounted stuff, while Lockwood
turned cook again, the first thing being to pulverize a lot of ice
and set it on the lamp to melt. Cape Britannia and Beaumont Island
were very distinctly seen, the latter from refraction double. Their
allowance of alcohol was a constant source of trouble. They could
not afford meat for both breakfast and supper, hence their supper
consisted of tea, cracker-dust, and bean-stew. Advanced twelve miles
in fourteen hours.

Lockwood and Brainard now took turns in cooking, Frederick being
excused. The two former did not sleep well, and, as usual, the
Esquimaux blew his trumpet loudly, but not sweetly. They left at 7
P. M. with full load, but as usual threw off a portion, leaving
Brainard with it. Toward midnight they came to an open crack in the
ice ten feet wide, through which sea-water could be seen below, and
had to follow it several hundred yards before coming to a crossing.
Thinking this a favorable chance to get a deep-sea sounding, they
threw off the load, and Frederick went back for Brainard and the
balance of the stores, while Lockwood got into a sleeping-bag and
read “King Lear” until their return. In sounding, they ran out all
the line they had, then four coils of seal-thongs, then some rope,
and finally Frederick’s dog-whip, and got no bottom at eight hundred
and twenty feet. They began to haul up after debating whether they
should not risk the dog-traces, when, presto! the rope broke, and
all below was lost. Leaving their treasures in the deep, they moved
on with half-load over a low line of hummocky ice having the same
general direction as the crack, namely, toward Beaumont’s Island.
Beyond was an unbroken field of snow extending apparently to Cape
Britannia. Ice being required for supper, they went into camp on the
hummocks, going back, however, for the stores left behind, having
advanced eight miles in ten hours.

After taking bearings, they broke camp at 4 P. M., and, with a full
load, proceeded over the level snowfield, broken here and there only
by hummocks trending in a curve toward Cape Britannia. Until
midnight the snow-crust sustained the sledge, but after that,
failing to do so, they had to reduce load. Wind and snow coming on,
they camped near a small ice-mound, after advancing fourteen miles
in fourteen hours, and again brought up the stores left behind.

The next morning proved clear and calm, and gave them a full view of
the long-desired cape, which they reached at 8 P. M., pitching tent
on the ice-foot—four miles in one hour and a half. Lockwood had read
so much of scurvy, deep snows, etc., as associated with
sledge-journeys in the experience of the English expedition, that he
had come to regard them as inseparable from such enterprises. Yet
here they were, at a point which Beaumont saw only from afar,
without the first and without serious difficulty from the others.
Cape Britannia had been the _ultima Thule_ of Beaumont’s hopes, and
quite as far as Lieutenant Greely expected Lockwood to reach. But he
was able to go much farther, and would do so. He built a cairn, and
deposited a record of their journey to date, also rations for five
days for use on their return, the spare sledge-runner, and
everything they could do without. Leaving Frederick to see that the
dogs did not eat up the tent and everything in it, Lockwood and
Brainard climbed the adjacent mountain, two thousand and fifty feet
high, to view the magnificent prospect spread out before them from
that point. “We seemed,” Lockwood writes, “to be on an island
terminating some miles to the north in a rocky headland. To the
northeast, seemingly twenty miles away, was a dark promontory
stretching out into the Polar Ocean, and limiting the view in that
direction. Intermediate, were several islands separated by vast,
dreary fiords, stretching indefinitely southward. Extending halfway
round the horizon, the eye rested on nothing but the ice of the
Polar Sea; in-shore, composed of level floes, but beyond, of ridges
and masses of the roughest kind of ice. The whole panorama was
grand, but dreary and desolate in the extreme. After erecting a
monument, we were glad to escape the cold wind by returning.”

While here, Lockwood took several astronomical observations. They
broke camp at 7 P. M., and traveled northward over smooth ice free
from snow, to the promontory, where they came in sight of the
distant headland northeast, which they had seen from the
mountain-top. Hearing a low, moaning sound, and looking to the
north, they saw a line of hummocks, and near it their old
acquaintance, the tidal crack, stretching in one direction toward
Beaumont Island, and in the other, curving toward Black Cape, as
Lockwood named the headland northeast of them. Repairing their
sledge, which had given way, they proceeded toward this headland,
having fairly good traveling though somewhat obstructed by soft and
deep snow, and camped at midnight near a hummock and not far from
the crack, from which Frederick tried, without success, to get a
seal. This would have relieved his mortified feelings at the loss of
a ptarmigan he had shot at the cape, and which Ritenbank had stolen.
Took observations for latitude and longitude before turning into
their sleeping-bags. Advanced eleven miles in five hours.

The observations were repeated next morning, and they then went on
their course. After going a considerable distance, they halted to
rest and to view the tide-crack, now near them and about one hundred
yards across, filled in here and there with young ice or detached
masses. This crack was incomprehensible, differing from those seen
in the straits, which were near shore and so narrow as to attract
little attention. Frederick gave Lockwood to understand by signs and
gestures that after a while the ice outside, or north of the crack,
would move oft seaward. Resuming their way, they soon after passed
Blue Cape, and thence crossing a small fiord got to Black Cape, the
bold, rocky headland they had seen from the mountain. Beyond Black
Cape, and in the same general direction, but seen indistinctly,
appeared a dark, rocky cape, which Lockwood called Distant Cape,
because, seeming so near, it was yet so far, as they afterward
found. At Black Cape were seen bear-tracks, also those of the fox,
hare, and lemming, in great numbers. The tide-crack here came near
the shore, and then extended directly across to the next cape. The
ice along shore indicated having sustained enormous pressure. Great
bergs and hummocks, weighing thousands of tons, had been pushed upon
the ice-foot like pebbles.

The ice-foot offering better traveling, they followed that course,
though it took them somewhat away from Distant Cape. Leaving it,
they crossed what seemed to them a little bay, but it took them one
hour and a half to reach the cape on the farther side. Seeing a
large fiord intervening between them and Distant Cape which they had
wished to reach before encamping, they gave up the effort and
pitched their tent. Soon after, Frederick shot a hare, but only
wounding him, they had to expend all their remaining strength in
running him down. But food was now everything, and they spared
neither the hare nor themselves. They called that point Rabbit
Point, in memory of the friend who served them a good turn. Advanced
seventeen miles in ten hours.

Having, on account of a snow-storm, failed to get the sun on the
south meridian, Lockwood waited until it should come round to the
north meridian, as this matter of observations was important, and
difficult to attend to _en route_. In the mean time, they cached
some rations. Saw some ptarmigans, but failed to shoot them. Left
near midnight, and having crossed the hummocks thrust in against all
these capes, reached the level surface of an immense bay which they
were two and one quarter hours in crossing, after untold labor and
fatigue, through deep snow, so wet that they seemed to be wading
through soft clay. They reached the opposite shore, bathed in
perspiration, Lockwood going in advance to encourage the dogs.
Sometimes they went down waist-deep. The mass of hummocks came up so
near the cliffs as to force the travelers outside. Still, Distant
Cape was farther on, with a fiord intervening. At four o’clock, they
reached this long-sought point, and looked ahead to see what lay
beyond. Away off in the same general direction (northeast) was seen
another headland, separated from them by a number of fiords and
capes, which lay on an arc connecting Distant Cape with that in the
far distance. Inclining to the right, they made their way toward one
of these intermediate capes. Sometimes seeing it and sometimes not,
they finally reached it at 6 A. M., and, being unable to see
anything ahead, went into camp. Soon afterward a pyramidal island
loomed up through the storm in the northeast. They enjoyed part of
their rabbit for supper, almost raw, for they had no alcohol to
waste on luxuries, and carefully laid away the other half for
further indulgence. But Ritenbank saw that half rabbit stowed away,
and he too liked rabbit, as will be seen. After supper Lockwood made
observations, and of trials and tribulations this was not the least.
Face chilled, fingers frozen, and sun so low as to require him to
lie in the snow; the sun like a grease-spot in the heavens, and
refusing to be reflected; snow-drifts over artificial horizon cover;
sextant mirrors becoming obscure, vernier clouded, tangent-screw too
stiff to work; then, when one had nearly secured a contact, some dog
interposing his ugly body or stirring up the snow; such were some of
the difficulties to be overcome. Still, these observations must be
made, and carefully and correctly made, or otherwise the chief value
of the expedition would be lost. They secured double sets of
observations here, which delayed them, but got off near midnight
from this cape, which Lockwood called Low Point, and made good time
toward the dim headland at the northeast. In two hours and a half
they reached the cape, which he named Surprise, because they came
upon it unexpectedly looming up through the gloom. Beyond and to the
right was seen through the storm a dome-capped island, the
inevitable inlet intervening. The traveling proving good, they
reached it at four, and found it to be the end of a long line of
grand, high, rocky cliffs, bearing far to the south.

The ice-foot here being free from snow, the dogs took the sledge
along at a trot, and the explorers rode by turns—the first time
since leaving Boat Camp. The trend of the coast-line becoming nearly
east, Lockwood began to think the time had come for leaving the
coast and striking off directly toward the pole, as arranged for in
his orders. As this was a matter requiring full consideration, he
stopped to get an observation, but, defeated in this by the drifting
snow, they went into camp at 6 A. M., having advanced seventeen
miles in less than seven hours.

After sleeping, Lockwood rose to take observations. While so doing,
and hence out of the tent, he heard a noise in it, and suspected
mischief. Sure enough, there was that old thief, Ritenbank, coolly
eating up the remains of the rabbit they had kept for a second
feast. A dash and a blow, and the dog scampered off, dropping part
of the animal in his flight. They had reached the state of not being
particular about what they ate, so they gathered up the remains and
ate them on the spot.

Resuming their journey at 1 A. M., they traveled under a long line
of high cliffs, with hills in the rear. The travel was excellent,
but the weather abominable—high winds, with falling and drifting
snow. After three hours of progress in an easterly course, a
headland was seen obliquely to their left, between which and
themselves lay a wide fiord. After an observation of the sun, they
struck directly across this fiord for the headland in question,
which they finally reached after repeatedly losing themselves in the
mist and gloom. Here they stopped awhile to eat pemmican and view
the surroundings. Found many rabbit-tracks, but saw none of the
animals. In Arctic traveling, one craves warm meat, but seldom gets
any but that which is frozen. Continuing along this coast over a
good ice-foot, they were pleased to see on their left a small island
with a high, narrow ledge, a few hundred yards long. This they
reached and went to the north side or end of it. Mist and snow
shutting in the land farther on, and also that already passed, they
camped, having advanced twenty-two miles in nine and a half hours.

Finding traveling so troublesome in the storm, and much difficulty
in getting observations, Lockwood resolved to remain there for
better weather, all sleeping as much and eating as little as
possible. Indeed, Brainard agreed with Lockwood that, if the
easterly trend of the coast should continue, they had better spend
their time in going directly north over the sea. On the 11th, it
being still stormy and no other land in sight, they remained in
their sleeping-bags on the island, which from its shape was first
called “Shoe Island,” but afterward “Mary Murray.” All of them
suffered greatly with cold feet in the mean while; and, although
Lockwood’s feet were wrapped in blankets, furs, and socks, they were
like lumps of ice. To husband their few rations, they had eaten very
little of late, and doubtless to this may be attributed their cold
feet. The dogs were ravenous for food. When feeding-time came, it
was amid blows from the men and fights among the dogs that the
distribution was made. Old Howler was conspicuous on these
occasions. That he might secure all he could, he bolted ball after
ball of the frozen mass, and then would wander around, uttering the
most unearthly howls while the mass was melting in his stomach. He
was, indeed, a character. He had an air of utter weariness and
dejection, as well he might, for who can be more miserable than the
dethroned monarch, jeered, cuffed, and condemned by his late
subjects? One day one of the dogs swallowed a live lemming, and the
little animal went squealing all the way down to the corporation.

The weather clearing up a little the next morning, Lockwood took sun
observations, and soon after saw a cape with very high land behind
it, at the northeast. But the storm setting in again, they could not
attempt to cross the mouth of the deep fiord intervening between
them and the cape until nearly two hours after midnight. The
traveling being good, and aided by a high wind, they made good time
across the fiord toward the cape, alternately visible and invisible,
and reached it in two hours. This cape proved to be the extremity of
a line of high, rocky cliffs, stretching toward the southeast. Here
they found the ice-foot entirely obstructed by lines of floe-bergs
and hummocks pressed up nearly to the foot of the cliff, and to add
to their difficulty, the tide-crack ran here close to the cape. With
great labor they got the dogs and sledge upon a hummock, thence
along its surface, using the axe, and finally lowered them down
again, and, by a bridge over the crack, gained a level floe half a
mile beyond the cape. There, finding a branch crack twelve or
fifteen feet wide, Frederick went forth to seek a crossing, while
Lockwood and Brainard obtained a peep at the sun for position. The
fog rising, the grandest view they had yet seen was suddenly
disclosed. To their right were seen the high cliffs connected with
the cape just passed, bending to the southeast to form an inlet.
Away beyond and across this inlet, and east of them, was the farther
shore—a line of very high cliffs, terminating in a bold headland
northeast of their position. Back of the cape and cliffs, the land
became higher and higher, till, just east of the travelers, stood a
peak apparently four thousand feet high. Between them and the cliffs
below the peak was seen an island of pyramidal shape and quite high.
The explorers made good time toward it, over a level floe, as some
hummocks and tide-cracks at the mouth of the inlet prevented them
from going direct to the cape. Thence, after a short rest and a
relish of pemmican, they took their way toward the cape, now
standing nearly north of them. Soon the snow became so deep and soft
that the sledge often sank below the slats, the dogs to their
bellies, and the men to their knees. Fortunately, the load was very
light, and yet, had not the deep snow soon after become dry and
feathery, they could not have proceeded. It was then that Lockwood
promised himself never to undertake another sledge-journey, a
resolve afterward easily forgotten when in camp with a full stomach.
Time, rest, plenty to eat, and a good smoke, sometimes make
philosophers, was the reflection recorded. About noon, after
changing their course around an easterly bend of the cliff, they
came to what might be regarded as the northern extremity of the
cape, beyond which lay the inevitable fiord. Here they camped on the
ice-foot, below a mass of picturesquely colored rocky cliffs, and
essayed, but failed, to get observations. Their advance was sixteen
miles in ten hours.

On the 14th of May, occurred a storm so violent that it seemed as if
the tent must be blown down. Ritenbank took advantage of it to
burrow under the tent and lay hold of a bag of pemmican, but a
timely blow on his snout “saved their bacon.” After discussion with
Brainard, Lockwood concluded to go no farther, as their remaining
rations would hardly suffice to enable them satisfactorily to
determine their present position. While waiting for the sun that
this might be done, they improvised a checker-board from the
chopping-board, and played some games. After a while, finding that
the cliffs somewhat interfered with the observations, they moved the
tent farther west, stopping to build a cairn, large and conspicuous,
and depositing a full record of their journey and a thermometer.
This cairn stood on a little shelf or terrace below the top of the
cliff. Brainard also cut “XXX Bitters” on the highest rock of the
cliff he could reach, Lockwood telling him he only wanted to get a
bottle for nothing on the strength of his advertisement. They were
engaged until midnight, chiefly in taking observations and in
collecting specimens of rocks and vegetation. Some snow-birds were
seen.

The next morning the weather became warm, beautiful, and delightful,
the sun bright and sky clear, and there was no wind—surely a bit of
sunshine in a shady place.

[Illustration: Taking Observations at Lockwood Island.]

They took advantage of this to bring out hand-gear, foot-gear, bags,
and rubber blankets to dry, everything having been damp or wet for
nearly a week. Lockwood and Brainard got but a few short naps after
supper, for it was necessary for one of them to be awake to insure
their getting up at the right time to take “double altitudes,” etc.
They secured a complete set of observations, thirty-six in all. A
few hours later, Lockwood and Brainard started to make the ascent of
the cliffs and of the height beyond. They gained a considerable
elevation, and stood on a little plateau overlooking both sides of
the promontory, the sea, and a large extent of mountainous country
to the south thickly covered with snow. Lockwood unfurled Mrs.
Greely’s pretty little silk flag to the breeze, and felt very proud
that, on the 15th day of May, 1882, it waved in a higher latitude
than was ever before reached by man. By careful astronomical
observations under peculiarly favorable circumstances, they found
themselves in latitude eighty-three degrees and twenty-four and a
half minutes north, longitude forty degrees and forty-six and a half
minutes west of Greenwich, thus surpassing the English, who sent the
Nares Expedition of 1875-’76, costing upward of a million dollars,
for the express purpose of reaching the north pole, and which
expedition sent its chief sledge-party directly north over the ice
for the purpose of making _latitude alone_. The view from their
lofty station was grand beyond description. At their feet, toward
the east, was another of those innumerable fiords, a bald headland
forming its farther cape, bearing northeast. Seemingly projecting
from its foot was a low point of land, doubtless separated from
another by still another fiord. This was as far as Lockwood could
see in that direction—probably fifteen miles. Thence round toward
the north and in the direction of Cape Britannia lay the vast Polar
Sea, covered with ice and desolate in the extreme. Toward the south
lay a vast panorama of snow-capped mountains, so overlapping and
merging one into another that it was impossible to distinguish the
topography of the country. They stayed on the top only twenty
minutes, and at 4.50 reached camp again, greatly to the delight of
Frederick. He had seemed a good deal “down at the mouth” of late,
which Brainard thought was caused by their long distance from home
and the absence of dog-food and “skaffer.” Hastily packing up their
small load, they started on their return at 5.30 P. M. Though taking
a more direct course across the first fiord, they met with soft
snow, which was very tiresome to pass through. The weather now
commenced to cloud up again, threatening another storm. It was very
fortunate that they reached their farthest just in time to take
advantage of the thirty hours of fine weather. However, they were
now homeward bound, and did not care for storms or anything else,
provided they could “_move on_,” nor did they require any policeman
to help them in that particular.

And now that Lockwood is returning from his special expedition in
safety and good health, a few additional facts and a passing
reflection on his exploit will not be out of place. Lieutenant
Lockwood’s motives in undertaking this special expedition, in which
he was so successful, he explained in these words: “My great wish is
to accomplish something on the north coast of Greenland which will
reflect credit on myself and on the expedition. But there are many
ifs in the way—many visible contingencies on which success depends,
as well as many invisible ones which have never suggested
themselves. Among the former, scurvy stands like a giant, and if
this giant attacks us, far from accomplishing anything, we may not
ourselves get back.” As we think of Lockwood, at the end of his
journey, with only two companions, in that land of utter desolation,
we are struck with admiration at the courage and manly spirit by
which he was inspired. Biting cold, fearful storms, gloomy darkness,
the dangers of starvation and sickness, all combined to block his
icy pathway, and yet he persevered and accomplished his heroic
purpose, thereby winning a place in history of which his countrymen
may well, and will be, proud to the end of time. Of all the heroic
names that have blossomed on the charts of the Arctic seas during
the present century, there is not one that will hereafter be
mentioned with more pride and enthusiasm than that identified with
Lockwood Island, memorable as the nearest point to the north pole
ever reached by man.




                                XII
             FROM LOCKWOOD ISLAND TO LADY FRANKLIN BAY.


When returning to Lady Franklin Bay, Lockwood and his companions
reached Shoe Island shortly after midnight. They deposited a record
in the cairn there, and proceeded to the cape west of the island,
where they went into camp, after a retreat of twenty miles in eight
hours. Lockwood suffered much from his eyes, having evidently
strained them while endeavoring to see the sun during the late
stormy weather. The cold food, upon which alone they could depend,
seemed to weaken the stomachs of all the party, and yet they plodded
on. At Storm Cape, they left the grand line of cliffs behind, and
took a compass course across the great fiord, amid a storm as before
when they crossed that inlet. As usual, the dogs thought they knew
best, and Frederick thought he knew best, so the compass received
little consideration, and they inclined too much to the left, being
three hours and twenty minutes in crossing. They stopped at a cairn
and deposited a record. In another hour they reached Pocket Bay, and
in another, Dome Cape, and then, crossing the inlet, went into camp.
“Skaffer” was soon ready, cold chocolate, and a stew with lumps of
ice floating round in it, particularly unfortunate after a march
which was perhaps the most uncomfortable of the trip. It had been
blowing and snowing all day directly in their faces—very severe on
snow-blind eyes, which it was necessary in crossing the fiords to
keep open in order to see the way. In addition to this, strange to
say, Lockwood suffered with cold hands. Generally, while traveling,
they were warm enough, and only got cold when stopping; but on that
day they were aching with cold a great part of the time. The dogs
had eaten up his seal-skin mits some time before, and the woolen
ones gave little protection against the storm, with the mercury 30°
below zero. They found the ice-foot now generally covered with snow,
but they retreated twenty-seven miles in eight hours and forty
minutes. Left camp shortly after 5 P. M., and, passing Cape
Surprise, struck directly across the fiord for Distant Cape. When
opposite their old camp at Low Point, a glacier was seen in the
interior, a green wall of ice lying at the foot of what looked like
a low, dome-shaped hill, but which must have been a mass of ice
covered with snow, as is all the interior of this country. The
travel over the floe was quite good, but when just beyond Distant
Cape, they found themselves in the deep snow of the wide fiord to
the west of it, a part of the route they had been dreading for some
time. They finally, however, reached the farther side. The dogs must
have smelled the pemmican in _cache_ there, for, during the last two
hundred yards, they bent all their energies to the work and seemed
wild to get ashore. They pulled the sledge through a fringe of
hummocky ice at the coast in a way that proved how they _could_ pull
when they set their hearts on business. The weather during the day
was variable. When they started, it was quite thick, and the wind
blew strongly in their faces, making the traveling very
disagreeable; but toward the latter part of the march, the wind died
away and the sun appeared. The traveling was better than when
outward bound, the late storm having improved it very much. Brainard
did all the cooking, Lockwood chopping the ice and assisting in
various ways. They got off a little after six, and in two hours were
at Black Cape. Here they stopped awhile and built a cairn, and at
Blue Cape stopped again. The next four and a half hours they pursued
their monotonous course across the floe, Lockwood indulging in these
reflections: “What thoughts one has when thus plodding along! Home
and everything there, and the scenes and incidents of early youth!
Home, again, when this Arctic experience shall be a thing of the
past! But it must be confessed, and lamentable, it is, as well as
true, that the reminiscences to which my thoughts oftenest recur on
these occasions are connected with eating—the favorite dishes I have
enjoyed—while in dreams of the future, my thoughts turn from other
contemplations to the discussion of a beefsteak, and, equally
absurd, to whether the stew and tea at our next supper will be hot
or cold.”

They next camped some miles from North Cape, opposite the immense
fiord there, which runs inland an interminable distance without
visible land at its head. Lockwood had intended going up this fiord
to what seemed like the opening of a channel on the south side of
Cape Britannia, but the uncertainty and their fatigue finally
induced him to continue the way they had come, the weather being
delightful. Ritenbank went about all day with his head and tail
down, perhaps repenting his numerous thefts. Advanced seventeen
miles in eight hours.

Left camp at 6 P. M., and in about three hours reached North Cape,
where they stopped some time to take a sub-polar observation, making
its latitude 82° 51′. Cape Britannia was reached without event, and
there they stopped long enough to get the rations left in _cache_,
and deposit a record in the cairn; then continued on the floe a
half-mile to get out of the shadow of the mountain. At the cairn
they got the snow-shoes left there, and the spare sledge-runner.
They also collected some specimens of the vegetation and rocks, and
saw traces of the musk-ox, showing that these animals wander even
this far north. They saw also some snow-birds. They had thought that
when they reached Cape Britannia they would feel near home; but now
having reached it, the station seemed as far off as at any point
they had left behind, and they could not rest until Cape Bryant was
reached.

The sun was very bright and warm when they left camp at 9.50 P. M.,
but a heavy fog hung like a curtain on the horizon, and shut out the
land all around. They were, in fact, traveling on the Polar Sea, out
of sight of land. Shortly after starting, Lockwood put on snow-shoes
to try them, and found immense relief at once. He blamed himself
every day for a week for not having tried them during the journey
out, and thus saved himself many hours of the most fatiguing travel
through deep snow. Brainard, seeing the advantage, put on the other
pair, and from that time there was nothing about which they were so
enthusiastic as the snow-shoes. They afterward wore them more or
less every day. At 6 A. M. they went into camp on the floe. The fog
by this time had disappeared, and everything was singularly bright
and clear. Advanced sixteen miles in eight hours, and got off again
a little after 8 A. M.

It was a beautiful day, calm and clear, and the sun was really too
warm for dogs and men. They got along very well, however, on the
snow-shoes, and one of the men keeping ahead to encourage the dogs
and make a straight course, they finally reached, at the place they
had crossed before, their old friend, the tidal crack, now frozen
over. They lunched regularly every day on pemmican and hard bread,
and rested whenever tired. A beautiful parhelion was seen, one of
the most complete yet observed, in the perfection of its circles and
the brightness of its colors. The blue, yellow, and orange were very
distinct. They went into camp after four, the weather cloudy and
threatening snow, having advanced sixteen miles in eight hours. They
left again at 8.40 P. M. Snow falling, and no land being in sight,
they kept near the right course by means of the compass. Their
course was north-west (magnetic), the variation being in the
neighborhood of ninety degrees. Went into camp near St. George’s
Fiord at 4.40 A. M., suffering a good deal from snow-blindness
afterward. During the march were troubled very little, strange to
say. Rations were now getting low. The snow was very soft, and,
owing to this and the warm sun, the dogs “complained” a good deal.
Advanced sixteen miles in eight hours. Started off again at 8.40 P.
M., reached shore shortly after twelve, about three quarters of a
mile short of Cape Bryant, and, following the coast, pitched tent at
the old camping-ground. After visiting the cairn on the hill, they
determined to make up arrears by having a royal feast—anticipated
for many days. “How nice that English bacon must be! How superior
that English pemmican to the abominable lime-juice pemmican!”
Brainard made a generous stew out of the aforesaid, with a liberal
allowance of desiccated potatoes, etc., and they “pitched in!” But
oh! what disappointment! Before eating a half-dozen spoonfuls they
came to a dead halt, and looked at each other. Even Frederick
stopped and gazed. The dish was absolutely nauseating. “Oft
expectation fails, and most where most it promises.” Fortunately,
there was left there a tin of frozen musk-ox meat, with other stores
rendered surplus by the supporting party being able to go no
farther. After this _feast_ on the English stores, they confined
themselves to the musk-ox. The English pemmican, though a little
musty, when eaten cold was quite palatable. This and the bacon were
each put up in metallic cases. The bacon they subsequently found to
be inclosed in _tallow_, and this it was that made their feast so
disappointing. After this they all went to look for Lieutenant
Beaumont’s _cache_, left here when his party was disabled by scurvy.
The search was unsuccessful, although they traveled the coast for
two miles and a half, advancing twelve miles in four hours. Getting
up at twelve, Lockwood and Brainard went out to the tide-crack about
half a mile from shore, and, by means of a rope and stone, undertook
to get a set of tidal observations. They kept up the observations
for nearly twelve hours, and then becoming satisfied that their
arrangements did not register the tide, owing to the depth,
currents, etc., gave it up, much disappointed. All their work went
for nothing. These observations made their eyes much worse, and both
suffered with snow-blindness all the rest of the way.

While thus occupied, the dogs took advantage of their absence to
visit the _cache_ and eat up part of a sack of hard bread and half a
dozen shot-gun cartridges—the shot and the brass being rather
indigestible. They left camp after midnight and a beautiful morning
followed, calm and clear, the sun unpleasantly warm; and no wonder,
since Lockwood was wearing three heavy flannel shirts, a
chamois-skin vest, a vest of two thicknesses of blanket (double all
round), a knitted guernsey and canvas frock, besides two or three
pairs of drawers, etc.

They tramped along on snow-shoes, and a couple of hours after
starting, Brainard, who was on the hill-side to the left,
discovered, with his one unbandaged eye, relics of Beaumont—an old
Enfield rifle, a pole shod with iron, a cross-piece of a sledge,
three or four articles of underwear, some cartridges, sewing-thread
and thimble, and the remains of a shoe with a wooden sole about an
inch thick. Other articles mentioned by Lieutenant Beaumont in his
journal were not to be found. They may have been carried off by
animals or buried in the snow near by. The articles found were in a
little bare mound near the ice-foot. “Poor Beaumont! how badly he
must have felt when he passed along there with most of his party
down with scurvy, dragging their heavy sledge and heavier
equipments!” Farther on, Lockwood shot a ptarmigan on top of a large
floe-berg thirty feet high, and, by taking advantage of a snow-drift
and doing some “boosting,” they secured the bird. They stopped at
_cache_ No. 3 (near Frankfield Bay) and took out what the supporting
party had left there. Gave the dogs the lime-juice pemmican and
ground beans, but it was only by seeming to favor first one dog and
then another that they were induced to eat it, thus illustrating the
advantage of their “dog-in-the-manger” spirit. Went into camp on the
east shore of Hand Bay. Their buffalo sleeping-bag now began to feel
too warm, but was always delightfully soft and dry. Eyes painful.
Advanced twelve miles in ten hours. After crossing Hand Bay they
made a short stop at Cape Stanton. The Grinnell coast now became
very distinct, and seemed home-like. They could see Cape Joseph
Henry, or what they took for that headland. The floes off shore,
consisting of alternate floes crossed by ridges of hummocks, made
very laborious traveling. On reaching the _cache_ near Stanton
Gorge, they got the rations left there. The traveling continued very
difficult and tiresome. On reaching the Black Horn Cliffs, they
decided, as their old tracks were entirely obliterated, to follow
along under the cliffs, instead of taking the wide _détour_ they had
made going out. They got along pretty well for a while, and then
reached a mass of hummocks and rubble-ice. There they found a relic
of the past—a towel which the men had used to wipe the dishes, and
had lost or abandoned. By dint of hard work they got through this
bad ice, crossed the smooth, level floe adjoining, and then came to
the next patch of rubble-ice. After proceeding through this some
distance, the sledge needing relashing, Lockwood went on alone with
the axe, making a road as he went. Found the site of their old camp
on the shore, but, as the snow slope there had become impassable, he
kept along the coast on the floe and finally found a landing several
miles to the west. Sledge and all got here at eight o’clock, and
they continued on over the snow slopes, passing the remains of the
“Nares” sledge and reaching Drift Point, where they went into camp
alongside a big floe-berg, with lots of icicles upon it waiting for
them, having advanced twenty-two and a half miles in ten hours.
Finding strong winds and snow from the west, they delayed starting
till almost midnight. The ice-foot along this low, sloping shore
being excellent, they made good time, in an hour reaching the place
of their first camp on this coast. The melting of the floe-bergs and
the fall of the snow had so changed the general aspect, that the
place was hardly recognizable. At 2 A. M. they came opposite the
break in the cliff where they had entered on the coast in April.
They soon made out the dark object seen previously from this point
to be a cairn, and discovered a small bay which they knew must be
Repulse Harbor. Crossing this bay, they reached the cairn at three
o’clock. It was a tremendous affair, and the tin can inside was full
of papers by Beaumont, Dr. Coppinger, and others. As a cold wind was
blowing, Lockwood made a short-hand copy of the documents and left
the originals.

Lockwood’s eyes filled with tears as he read the last postscript of
the several which followed the main record of poor Beaumont. Sitting
on these bare rocks amid snow and wind, with a desolate coast-line
on one side, and the wide, dreary straits on the other, he could
well appreciate what Beaumont’s feelings must have been when he
reached here with his party all broken down with scurvy, and, after
trying to cross the straits and failing on account of open water,
had no other recourse but to try and reach Thank-God Harbor. His
last postscript reads thus:

“Repulse Harbor Depot, June 13, 1876.—Three of us have returned from
my camp, half a mile south, to fetch the remainder of the
provisions. D—— has failed altogether this morning. Jones is much
worse, and can’t last more than two or three days. Craig is nearly
helpless. Therefore we can’t hope to reach Polaris Bay without
assistance. Two men can’t do it. So will go as far as we can and
live as long as we can. God help us!
                                       (Signed)    “L. A. Beaumont.”

He and Gray were the only ones left, and both shortly discovered
scorbutic symptoms.

Chilled through, Lockwood now continued along the coast to the west,
following the ice-foot under a grand line of cliffs. After a while,
they came to a narrow break or cleft in the cliffs, the gateway of a
small mountain-torrent. It was like a winding and dark alley in a
city, with vertical sides rising to the height of several hundred
feet. Entering it, they presently came to an immense snow-drift,
probably fifty or more feet high and filling up the gorge like a
barricade, with another a little beyond. They returned to the
sledge, thoroughly satisfied that Beaumont never went through that
place. About seven they came to what seemed to be the “Gap Valley”
of the English, a wide, broad valley, extending due south about
three miles to a ravine. They therefore turned off from the coast
and followed it, encountering a good deal of deep snow and bare,
stony spots. At 11 A. M. they camped in the ravine near its head,
thoroughly tired out. They now had only one day’s food left, and it
behooved them to make Boat Camp in another march, even though fifty
miles off. Advanced seventeen miles in eleven hours. The dogs for
several days had been on short allowance, and during their sleep
tore open the bag of specimen rocks and stones, but fortunately did
not chew them up as they had done the cartridges.

Getting off at 3.29 and crossing the table-land, they struck a
narrow gorge running precipitately down to Newman’s Bay. At its head
was a mountainous drift of snow, which they descended on the run;
then came a number of smaller drifts, completely blocking up the
gorge, over which they had to lower the sledge by hand. Near the
bay, they discovered a singular snow-cave one hundred feet long, and
occupying the entire bed of the stream, arched through its whole
length by beautiful ribs of snow, from which depended delicate
snow-crystals. The entrance was quite small, but inside, the roof
was far above their heads. They lost sight of its picturesqueness in
the thought of its fitness for the burrow of a sledge-party. This
brought them on the smooth surface of the bay, with familiar
landmarks before and around them—Cape Sumner, Cape Beechy, and far
in the distance, Distant Point and the land near Franklin Bay.
Looking back at the ravine from the bay, Lockwood felt sure no one
would ever take this little, insignificant, narrow gully for the
route of a sledge-party, and that no one traveling this, or the one
they took going out, would ever take either again in preference to
going round Cape Brevoort. They delayed along the shore of the bay
almost an hour, leisurely building a cairn and viewing the scenery,
and then going on, reached the farther side at eight o’clock, making
their last final retreat of ten miles in five hours and a half.
There was the whale-boat, and pitched alongside it, anchored down by
stones and held by ropes, the six-man tent of the supporting party.
Inside were Sergeants Lynn and Ralston, and Corporal Ellison, fast
asleep. Lockwood had told Lynn to send back to Conger three of his
party on reaching Boat Camp. The remaining three awaited his return.
The work of pitching tent woke up the other party, and soon they
heard the sound of the Polaris fog-horn (picked up near by), and saw
three heads projecting from the tent, whose owners gave them a warm
welcome, as well they might, after awaiting their return nearly a
month at this place, the dreariest of all in that dreary region. The
remaining stores were ransacked for a big feast, without regard to
the rations. Corned and boiled beef, canned potatoes and beans,
butter, milk, and canned peaches, made a meal fit for a king or for
gods that had just experienced an Arctic sledge-journey. The
monotonous life of these men had been varied only by a visit from
two bears, and the arrival of Dr. Pavy—sent by Lieutenant Greely
with some rations.

The news from the station was that Dr. Pavy with Sergeant Rice and
Esquimaux Jans had got only as far as Cape Joseph Henry, when they
were stopped by open water. Lockwood had taken it for granted that
the doctor would attain Markham’s latitude and excel his own.
Lieutenant Greely had been west from Fort Conger on a trip of twelve
days in the mountains, and had discovered a large lake with a river
flowing out of it, which had no ice on its surface—something very
wonderful. The vegetation had also shown a much milder atmosphere
than anywhere else in these latitudes. Numerous Esquimaux relics had
been found, and many musk-oxen seen.

Turning their backs on the Boat Camp, and with many loud blasts on
the Polaris fog-horn, they started at 11.25 P. M. for Fort Conger.

The snow along the snow-slopes was badly drifted, but with so many
to help, they got along without much delay and soon reached Cape
Sumner. They found the rubble-ice south of that point worse than
before, and here and there were little pools of water. The weather
was very thick, the wind blowing and snow falling, and the farther
side of the straits completely hidden, so that they went _via_ the
Gap, but there had to leave the shore and direct their course as
well as possible by compass. Presently they could see neither shore,
and got into a mass of rubble-ice, mixed with soft snow-drifts. Lynn
and party (Ralston and Ellison) had not traveled any for so long
that they began to get very much fatigued, and could not keep up
with the sledge. They had not slept since the arrival at the Boat
Camp, owing to the excitement of the occasion. The driving snow hurt
their eyes, and they were a very sorry party. However, they kept on,
and finally came in sight of the west coast, and some hours
afterward, finding good floes to travel over, a little before noon
reached the “tent on the straits”—about five miles from Cape
Beechy—Ellison and Ralston completely exhausted.

_En route_ again, they spread the American flag on a long pole and
carried it thus till they reached the station. At the snow-house,
where they remained some hours to rest and get something to eat,
they found Ellis and Whistler, who had come up from Fort Conger to
look out for the party.

All found their eyes more or less affected excepting Frederick.
Ralston’s were so bad that he was sent on in advance, led by Ellis.
He walked almost the whole way with his eyes closed. Lynn held on to
the upstanders of the sledge, and thus found his way.

On the first day of June, Ralston and Lynn went in advance, led by
Ellis and Ellison. They could not see at all, and, as their guides
carried the guns and each had his man made fast by a strap, they
looked very much like a party of prisoners. At Watercourse Bay they
met Lieutenant Greely, who had come out to meet them, and was well
satisfied with the result of the expedition, and soon after they
reached Fort Conger.

Lieutenant Lockwood not only received many hearty congratulations
from his companions, but even the weather, as if in sympathy with
the general gladness, became bright and cheerful. The important
business of working out the latitude that had been attained was now
proceeded with. Efforts were made to verify the prismatic compass
which was serviceable, but had a limited range. Much of the ground
around the station was bare of snow, and, as the temperature was
rising rapidly, Lockwood felt as if he would like to be off again on
a wild tramp. When he said something about certain sledge operations
in the future, Greely replied, “If you are content to go, I will
give you all the help I can.”




                               XIII.
                       WAITING AND WATCHING.


To a man of Lockwood’s character, the return to the station did not
mean that idleness was to be the order of the day, and while yet
suffering from rheumatic pains in his back, shoulders, legs, feet,
and joints, he began to mark out a trip for himself through Lady
Franklin Bay. In the mean time, some of the men were off trying to
obtain fresh meat, Frederick killing a hare and Jans a seal weighing
over five hundred pounds. Kislingbury amused himself with a pet owl,
which delighted him with a present of eggs. On the 9th of June, the
people at the station celebrated the birthday of their companion
Long by a good dinner, and on the following day Lockwood,
accompanied by his friends Brainard and Frederick, started with a
dog-train for his proposed tramp. They made their first halts at
Basil Norris Bay and at Sun Bay, and traveling over a level bed of
what had once been a fiord, thence passed on to Stony Point, and
then to Miller’s Island, where they encamped. Although they saw a
number of seals, they succeeded in killing only a couple of hares
and a brace of brants. Their next stopping-place was Keppel’s Head,
the route being very wet, in fact, almost a continuous lake. Having
nothing to wear but his moccasins, Lockwood’s feet were saturated
three minutes after starting, and became so cold that he thought
they would freeze. The pools were sometimes so deep as to wet the
load on the sledge. However, the dogs made good time, and they
reached Keppel’s Head at 11 P. M. Here the traveling became much
better, and they were able to avoid a good many of the pools.

Passing Keppel’s Head, they kept a sharp lookout for Hillock Depot,
where Lieutenant Archer, R. N., had left a large number of rations.
They searched for some time before finding any signs, but finally
found the _cache_, and near by some pieces of United States hard
bread, and a little bag of American tea. This was interesting, as
proving that to have been the farthest that Long attained, although
he claimed to have reached the head of the fiord. The unpleasant
task then devolved on Lockwood of taking him down a peg or two.
Lieutenant Archer was a week reaching this place, Hillock Depot,
half-way up the fiord, which is about sixty miles long. The scenery
is grand. High cliffs, generally nearly vertical, ran along the
shores everywhere. Whenever they looked inland they saw a lofty mass
of snow-covered mountains. All this was so common, however, in all
the region, that it was only when _new_ that it was appreciated.
Lockwood and Brainard had a good laugh at Long’s expense, and then
turned into the two-man summer sleeping-bag, made of two blankets,
trimmed off so as to weigh no more than necessary, and inclosed in
another bag of light canvas. Their breakfast consisted of corned
beef, baked beans, tea, hard bread, and butter—a very fine repast.
Lockwood and Brainard both thought that this kind of traveling did
not pay on a “picnic” excursion, but, as they had started to go to
the head of the fiord, they did not like to turn back. The ice
promised to be worse on their return, and this, and Lockwood’s lame
foot, and the lameness of one of the dogs, decided him to return.
Leaving camp on return, they soon reached Keppel’s Head, and
afterward Basil Norris Bay, where they camped, and decided to remain
a day or two and have a hunt for musk-oxen. Mud, water, and
“sludge,” as well as Lockwood’s lameness, proved a drawback to his
success; but Frederick returned from his tramp, bringing along a
quarter of a musk-ox, having killed two and wounded a third, he
said. They seemed to have cost two dozen cartridges, and he had
probably stood off at a distance and bombarded them.

Brainard returned after him. He had been up the vale as far as the
lake, and had seen a few geese and a rabbit. He brought back a
“skua” bird and some Esquimaux relics; had seen several circles of
stone, marking the summer camps of these people, and picked up a
good many bones, etc. All had something to eat, when the two started
out with the dog-team for the musk-oxen killed by Frederick. Then
came on a heavy rain, lasting for several hours, while the snow and
ice were fast disappearing. This was the first rain they had seen in
the country.

During their absence from the station, to which they returned with
their game, seven musk-oxen had been killed and four calves caught
alive. The men had had an exciting time. The animals formed a hollow
square with the calves inside, and did some charging before they
were all down.

The calves had been put in a pen a short distance from the house,
were very tame, and it was supposed little difficulty would be found
in raising them. They ate almost anything.

On the 17th, Lockwood expressed his feelings as follows: “I find
myself oppressed with _ennui_, caused, I suppose, by the present
monotonous existence following the activity of my life since the
early spring.”

On the 22d of June, a “turn-stone” (a bird of the snipe species) and
two or three ducks were shot. The little stream back of the house
was babbling along at a great rate, the snow fast disappearing.
Temperature 44°, which was about as high as it was likely to be, the
sun having reached its greatest northern declination, and the
temperature not having gone above this during the previous August.

On the 24th, Lieutenant Greely and a party left for Hazen Lake and
beyond, to visit the western coast of the country if possible. In
the mean time, the dogs having attacked the young musk-oxen, came
near killing one of them. The dog King and two others were found on
top of “John Henry,” the smallest of the calves, and, but for
Frederick happening to see them and going to the rescue, “John
Henry” would soon have surrendered his ghost.

During a walk on the 28th, Lockwood found North Valley River quite
full, and rushing along like a mountain-torrent. Open water-pools
were numerous near the shore. Had a fine view from Cairn Hill, two
thousand feet high, seeing extensive lanes of open water toward
Petermann’s Fiord. Weather delightful.

On the 1st of July they had the second rain of the season, and
Lockwood was gloomy; existence extremely monotonous; he was almost
ashamed to confess how “blue” he felt. Ducks and other fowl brought
in almost daily; also Esquimaux relics frequently brought in. Men
arrived from Lieutenant Greely’s party on Lake Hazen and reported
all well there. He had found many interesting relics, and had seen
large droves of musk-oxen—between two and three hundred—in Black
Vale. On the 4th the men at the station celebrated the day by
displays of flags, shooting and other matches, and a base-ball game.
They succeeded in getting the Lady Greely afloat, and Cross repaired
pipes found to be out of order. They found that the flies were
blowing their fresh meat badly. Fearing that it might be lost, it
was ordered to be served more frequently. Long and Ellis, who had
returned from St. Patrick’s Bay, reported it as open.

Lieutenant Greely and party returned on the 10th from Lake Hazen.
They had a good view westward for fifty miles from a mountain four
thousand feet high; saw no sea, but many glaciers. Found a large
river entering the lake at its southwestern extremity.

Lockwood took the launch down to Dutch Island, giving all the men an
excursion. But for entertainments of this sort he was afraid he
should forget how to talk. The officers often went through a meal
without exchanging a word; so also through the day. He could not say
who was in fault.

Loose ice was still filling the harbor and bay—paleocrystic floes
that had floated in.

Brainard and Cross brought in eleven ducks killed at Breakwater
Point, having to swim in order to get them.

Weather now mild, ice in harbor much broken up, and channel outside
open. Lieutenant Greely thought there was every reason for expecting
a relief-ship soon. It was very desirable on many accounts that she
should come. A false alarm of her approach created great excitement.
Some one said he saw her smoke in the distance.

The hunters brought in ducks or other game almost daily. A weasel
was shot near the house—a beautiful little animal, yellow with black
tail. Dead wolves were sometimes found—probably those poisoned in
the winter. Brainard, Cross, and Ellis returned from Beechy, where
they killed three musk-oxen, two dozen geese, and some ducks.

Lockwood occupied himself on his maps of the Greenland coast, adding
pictures of scenery from sketches taken _en route_.

Jans, desiring to capture seals, tried to approach them by
interposing a cotton screen. But the seal had too much sense to wait
for him, and slipped off the ice into the water.

On the 31st, Lockwood measured some ice-floes aground in the harbor,
finding them to be fourteen feet thick. He had seen many on his
northern trip which, by Nares’s rule of one seventh above water,
would have been thirty-five to forty-five feet thick. Of course,
these were paleocrystic floes, the accumulation of years.

On the 7th of August, Lockwood went with Lieutenant Greely and a
party in the launch to Cape Lieber, finding the bay very free from
ice. Left near the cape some provisions for use in case of having to
retreat next year in boats, a subject which, from the non-arrival of
the ship, was then agitated. They got many Esquimaux relics. The
straits away down as far as Franklin Island and Cape Constitution,
as seen from an elevation, were free from ice. They could see
nothing to prevent the ship from coming. Returned in the evening,
landing at Proteus Point, because a large floe-berg had floated in
during their absence and occupied their harbor.

Lieutenant Greely did not expect the ship before the 15th. Many eyes
were daily fixed on the bold profile of Cape Lieber, from behind
whose rocky face she must emerge, if she came at all.

On the 13th, Lockwood, with Brainard, Lynn, Cross, Ralston, and
Fredericks, started in the launch on an excursion up Lady Franklin
Bay to the head of Archer Fiord, having in tow the boat Valorous
with Rice and crew as far as Musk-ox Bay. There they left Rice and
his boat and proceeded up the Archer Fiord, somewhat annoyed by
scattered ice and by some large bergs which they had to go around.
They had not gone far up the fiord before they saw, on a gentle
slope of the southern shore, a herd of musk-oxen grazing a few
hundred yards from the water. Though strategy was employed to
approach without being seen, the herd took the alarm and scampered
over the hills which terminated the slope. Lynn, anticipating this,
had gone some way up these heights, but the animals by a _détour_
avoided him and soon passed over the crest of the heights. The slope
along there was sufficiently gentle to afford foothold to grass and
willows, and thus presented a landscape charming to those who had
gazed on little other than rocks and ice for so many months. Seeing
two other oxen some time after, near a steep hill overlooking a
rocky gorge, Lockwood, Brainard, and Frederick went for them,
Fredericks approaching in front, and Lockwood and Brainard, by a
flank movement, cutting off retreat. This resulted in the slaying of
both animals. But how to get them to the launch was the question, as
they were then a mile inland. Finally, cutting off the heads, they
gave the bodies an impetus down-hill. They went from steep to steep
like comets, leaving clouds of dust behind. Once or twice they
lodged on steps or terraces, from which they were dislodged, thence
to renew their journey downward. Afterward several other musk-oxen
and some ptarmigans were shot, thus providing abundant food for all
hands, with a large surplus to carry back to the station.

As they progressed up the fiord, the scenery became more and more
grand and interesting. A glacier was seen some distance inland, at
the head of a stream bordered by vertical cliffs curiously colored
and of fantastic shapes. One pinnacle was apparently surmounted by
an old dilapidated castle. Though the fiord was not wide at Bulley’s
Lump, nor the cliffs very high, yet they encountered a furious wind,
as though blowing vertically. Toward the head of the fiord, they saw
numerous ducks and flocks of geese on shore, apparently overcome by
the force of the wind. Many of these they added to their abundant
stores. Here, too, they found Esquimaux relics, indicating the
abodes of men long years ago—circles of stones, very old; also
pieces of drift-wood, whence coming they marveled. Reaching the head
of the fiord, where the water became shallow, they landed, spread
their sleeping-bags on the rocks, and made amends for their
twenty-five hours’ want of sleep.

Waking up, they found that the receding tide had left them high and
dry by one quarter of a mile. This rendered Lockwood very uneasy,
and induced him to give up his intended journey of half a dozen
miles into the interior. He went, however, a mile or so inland, and
from a height saw a lake, and several miles above it a glacier,
apparently very large. Vast cliffs, three thousand feet high,
bordered the valley or ravine he followed, and beyond these were
snow and ice clad summits of vast elevation. Yet here, in this
desolate region, were seen proofs of the abode of man—circles of
stones covered with lichens, a proof of their antiquity. Here, also,
he found the hip-bone of some immense mammal, and afterward added it
to his museum. He returned to the launch near the time of high tide,
and after lightening, they got the launch into deep water, with much
labor, but greatly to their relief. On their return they visited
Record Point, left a short account of their visit, and copied that
of Lieutenant Archer. He had explored this fiord in 1876, occupying
one month, but they did it in sixty-nine hours. He traveled with
sledges and a supporting party—they with a steam-launch, all being
on board. Their coal getting low, they made few other stops _en
route_ except to pick up their meat and game, returning direct to
the station. The result of the expedition, as to game, was, twelve
musk-oxen, three hares, twenty-four geese, thirty-six turn-stones,
six knots, three terns, and twenty ptarmigans. Distance made, going
and returning, one hundred and forty miles. Long and others killed
numbers of musk-oxen during their absence, so that they now had on
hand about eight thousand pounds of fresh beef. Another musk-ox was
killed, soon after their return, in full view of the house, and thus
four hundred and thirty pounds were added to their stock. This was
the eightieth musk-ox shot since their arrival, the year before.
They had a good view of the bay and straits, both of which seemed
open, offering no obstacle whatever to the passage of the ship. They
were all very much disappointed at her non-appearance.

Lieutenant Greely, wanting Howgate’s Fiord explored and surveyed,
and Dr. Pavy wishing to make an excursion from Cape Baird, Lockwood,
on the 21st, left in the launch, with Rice, Cross, Lynn, Fredericks,
Snyder, and Israel, and with Dr. Pavy and Ellison as passengers, to
land the doctor on the south shore, and thence proceed westward to
Howgate’s Fiord. Following a lead westward, they finally found open
water, which enabled them to reach the south shore of the bay some
five miles above Cape Baird, where they landed the doctor and
Ellison, with their rations, etc. In crossing the open water, they
had strong south winds, and heavy seas which boarded the launch and
washed her from stem to stern. Though much strengthened against ice,
when heavily laden she sat too near the water to be a comfortable
sea-boat. Thence they proceeded to Miller Island, where they had
smooth water, and were enabled to cook their food and enjoy an
excellent meal. They found much ice in Howgate’s Fiord, yet, after
trying to kill a musk-ox seen on shore, made their way to Ida Bay,
at its head, and proceeded to the north shore, for Israel to lay out
his base-line and take angles, and Rice to take photographs of
prominent objects. While they were so doing, the others started in
pursuit of a musk-ox some distance from the shore. The animal,
seeing them, went up the valley at a rapid rate, leaving behind him
so strong a musk odor as to mark his wake as distinctly by the smell
as that of a steamboat is marked by the eye. Lockwood abandoned the
chase for other duties, but the men kept on, and afterward brought
in the animal’s carcass. These having returned, and Israel and Rice
having finished their work, all proceeded toward a very high, and
conspicuous promontory, marking the entrance to the bay, which
Lieutenant Greely wished Lockwood to ascend, and afterward go up the
northern arm of the fiord; but they were unable to do either, having
been brought to a full stop in the narrow channel by an immense floe
of old ice. They therefore returned out of this _cul-de-sac_ to the
south shore, where Israel wanted to take other angles. Here they
found traces of Esquimaux habitations—meat _caches_, and various
bone implements, all very old. Thence, _via_ Miller’s Cape, they
made their way to Stony Cape, not, however, without great difficulty
because of moving ice, which sometimes forced them too close to the
island, and compelled them to make _détours_. The weather
threatening, they did not stop to take other angles, but crossed to
the head of the bay, near the Bellows, and cast anchor; and, while
the others slept, Lockwood walked up the Bellows in quest of game,
but saw none.

The vegetation was just sufficient to remind him of the glorious
trees and grasses of another zone far, far away. Still, with all its
desolation, Lockwood thought it a very picturesque region, and that
perhaps the moon, to one on its surface, presents a similar aspect.
They left for the station on the 25th, encountering much ice all the
way. Off Cape Clear it whirled about in such a manner as to threaten
to crush the launch. At one time a large piece of ice—larger than
the launch itself—was caught between the moving pack and the
grounded ice and thrown up into the air fifteen feet. Finally, they
reached the station, sadly disappointed not to see the masts of the
hoped-for ship. They could not divine the reason for her
non-appearance. Dr. Pavy thought that it never started, for want of
an appropriation. Lieutenant Greely thought otherwise. It looked
then as though they would have to retreat in boats during the next
summer, and might fail to meet the ship in the channel; or, on
reaching Littleton Island, find she had not been there, and then
undoubtedly all of them would perish.

A fine salmon-trout of three pounds and three quarters was caught in
a net about this time, and, while Rice tried to obtain more,
Brainard went to Depot “B” on a hunt for musk-oxen and other game.

On the 26th, Lockwood went across Lady Franklin Bay in the launch
after Dr. Pavy. Saw many seals, but failed to secure any. Found the
doctor and Ellison awaiting them, forlorn enough. They had reached
Carl Ritter Bay, seen musk-oxen, and discovered some lakes. Lockwood
left more stores over the bay, and returned through much ice. It was
pleasant to see how readily the launch cut through the young ice
then forming in the midst of falling snow.

On the 28th, Lieutenant Greely, desiring some further exploration up
Ella Bay, and inland from its head, Lockwood and a select party made
several attempts in the launch to accomplish it; but the young ice
was forming so rapidly, there was so much pack-ice, and the snow was
obscuring the atmosphere so badly, that Lieutenant Greely, after
some hesitation, decided they had better not go, and, instead,
requested them to take the long-boat Valorous to Cape Baird and
leave her there, and then lay up the steam-launch for the winter.

This they attempted to do, but, on reaching Dutch Island, had to
give it up, as the entire harbor, bay, and straits were full of
drifting ice, many of the floes standing five feet out of water. The
launch having been left at anchor near the island, the next morning
Lieutenant Greely ordered all hands down to the island to rescue her
from impending peril. They found her very much careened and half
full of water. She had been anchored in shoal water, and, heeling
over at ebb-tide, had filled at the next flood. Fortunately, no harm
was done to the boat, which might yet prove to be their salvation,
and should be got into safe winter quarters, as that season was
evidently already setting in. It was after this boat excitement that
Lockwood indulged in these reflections: “I find myself constantly
reading over old letters brought with me and received at St. John’s,
though read before again and again. The effect is depressing,
bringing too strongly into view home and the dear ones there. I am
oppressed with _ennui_ and low spirits, and can’t shake off this
feeling, partly induced by the cruel disappointment of _no ship_.”

Subsequently he wrote, “Have been reading of Kane and his travels.
He is my _beau idéal_ of an Arctic traveler. How pitiful that so
bold a spirit was incased in so feeble a frame! Why is Nature
inconsistent? In the Arctic his health seems to have been fair. He
of all his advance party escaped the scurvy. It was his spirit,
doubtless, that kept him up. Hayes does not compare with him. Though
beautifully written, there is an air of exaggeration about Hayes’
book, which destroys its interest. Doctor Pavy, who has hitherto
been the advocate of Hayes, since his return from Carl Ritter Bay
seems to have changed his mind about him, and now agrees with Greely
and me that Hayes never reached Cape Lieber. To have done so, he
must have performed in part of his journey ninety-six miles in
fourteen hours—an impossibility.

“The life we are now leading is somewhat similar to that of a
prisoner in the Bastile: no amusements, no recreations, no event to
break the monotony or dispel _ennui_. I take a long walk every day
along shore to North Valley with that view, study French a little,
or do some tailoring, now doubly necessary, as our supply of
clothing is getting low. Our stock of reading matter, unfortunately,
is limited except in Arctic books. One must live up here within
himself, and is unfortunate if dependent on others for happiness.
The others are as moody as I am—Greely sometimes, Kislingbury
always, and as to the doctor, to say he is not congenial is to put
it in a very mild way indeed. But why not study? Well, the
atmosphere is not conducive to it. I must go on another
sledge-journey to dispel this gloom. Lieutenant Greely was thinking
of sending me to Lake Hazen to continue his explorations, but thinks
the snow too deep. I will make a trip to the Bellows, and follow up
the cañon at its head.

“The hilarity in the other room is in marked contrast to the gloom
in this. For several days the skating on the young ice of the
harbor, now three inches thick, has afforded pleasure to the men.
Israel broke in some distance from shore, and, being unable to get
out by himself, would have perished but for the aid of others who
saw him after he had been in the cold water fifteen minutes.
Biederbick is constantly chaffed by the men for his persistent
gunning expeditions, from which he always returns empty-handed. He
takes everything seriously, and hence resents with warmth any
insinuations against Germany, particularly if his own little
principality of Waldeck be assailed. Biederbick tried to poison some
foxes, and boasted of his plans. A fox having been caught by some
one else and killed, Henry placed the body near Biederbick’s poison,
first placing within its mouth a paper stating (as though written by
the fox) how and where he met his death. Soon after Biederbick
inspected his poison, and finding the fox, brought him home in
triumph. Henry gravely declared the fox had not been poisoned, much
to Biederbick’s amazement. They proceeded to examine the fox, and
Henry pulled from its throat the certificate that had been placed
there. The men around laughed at Biederbick’s expense, and he
wilted.”

The foregoing allusion to Dr. Kane can not but be read with special
interest, as it gives one an insight into the noble character of
Lockwood, who had the heart to appreciate a man like the discoverer
of Grinnell Land. Both, indeed, were men of rare and exalted
qualities, whose memories will always be treasured with respect and
affection by the whole American people.

An effort was made under Lieutenant Kislingbury to raise, from
calves caught, a herd of tame musk-oxen. They became very docile and
tractable, even to the extent of hauling in teams. The chief
difficulty was to keep the dogs from them. One of these calves was
seriously wounded by them, and was therefore killed. It was rumored
that its meat would be served for dinner, and some of the men, to
carry out the joke, hung the quarters on the meat-rack near the
house. When other meat was served for dinner, Fredericks, who had
cared for the calf and named it John Henry, ate nothing—very proper
conduct for a man of feeling and a hater of jokes.

Lockwood frequently went to the observatory with Israel to get some
insight into the workings of the magnetic instruments. On
“term-day,” the instruments were read every five minutes during the
twenty-four hours, and for one hour every twenty seconds. “Poets
write of the constancy of the magnetic needle,” said Lockwood,
“while in fact it is the most inconstant thing known. Not only does
it vary yearly, but monthly, daily, hourly, yea, every minute and
second. Here the magnetic disturbances are very pronounced, and at
times the magnetic needle is apparently almost beside itself. The
aurora, too, has frequently a very noticeable effect upon it.”

It was now becoming a matter for discussion that, should they be so
unfortunate as to have to spend a third winter in this region, they
would have to live on salt meat and hard bread. Dr. Pavy said they
were already getting short of many articles of food, and of some
they were entirely out—short of sugar and also of candles and
foot-gear, of the latter, only a few pairs of cork-soled boots,
unfitted for use in these parts, remaining. Lockwood felt that he
would rather take any risks in boats than stay there another winter.

The weather, which had been variable, having settled calm and clear,
Lockwood started on his proposed sledge trip up the “Bellows” with
Jewell, the Esquimaux Frederick, and an eight-dog team. Having young
ice most of the way and no load, they made rapid progress to the
tent at Basil Norris Bay. The dogs moved at a gallop, giving to all
the rare opportunity of a ride. Here they found sleeping-bags and
provisions. The next morning they reached Black Rock Vale and
followed the windings of its stream-bed until they came to Lake
Heintzelman, a beautiful body of water, or rather ice, perfectly
smooth and free from snow, filling the whole valley, some three
miles wide, to towering cliffs, and extending about five miles. So
smooth was the surface that the dogs could have pulled a ton.
Feeling rather chilly, they all held on to the upright of the sledge
behind, and were dragged along on the soles of their shoes. Reaching
the head of the lake, and finding the way so rough as to endanger
the sledge-runners, they deemed it best to go into camp and
reconnoitre before proceeding farther. While Lockwood and Jewell got
supper, Frederick went on a hunt for musk-oxen. The former afterward
followed with the team to bring in the game which he had killed,
first skinning and cutting it up, not an easy job, as they had only
a very dull hatchet and equally dull case-knives. They finally
succeeded, however, after much labor, and returned to camp at a late
hour. The ox killed was the only one seen, although it was
there—three miles above the lake—that a hundred had been formerly
seen. The following morning being chilly and the sky overcast, they
returned to the tent at Basil Norris Bay, the dogs carrying the men,
as well as nearly four hundred pounds of meat, over the smooth lake
at a rapid rate.

While crossing they heard an unusual noise, like distant thunder,
which at first they were unable to account for, but finally
concluded was due to the cracking of the ice, arising probably from
changes of temperature. The whole expanse of ice was marked by
cracks extending in every direction, not, however, coming to the
surface, but visible below.

In returning to the station, they avoided some rough places by
hugging the south shore of the harbor, a rumbling noise of moving
and crushing ice being heard in the direction of Dutch Island. On
reaching the station, they found that a large bear had visited the
house, dragging off the skeleton of a musk-ox which Dr. Pavy had
hung out to dry as a specimen. Tracks of another bear were afterward
seen near the house. At Lieutenant Greely’s request, Lockwood with
others followed these tracks, came in sight of the animal, and saw
him make his way toward the middle of the straits through leads of
open water and over hills of ice with seeming ease. Of course, they
failed to add bear-meat to their well-stocked larder.

After enjoying a hot bath, which Lockwood commended as a grand
luxury, he penned the following from his corner in the
station-house:

“The men have added a bagatelle-board to their other sources of
amusement, and sometimes have bagatelle tournaments. Lieutenant
Greely and I often play chess, and sometimes I take a game of
checkers with the Esquimaux. These, by-the-way, seem much better
reconciled than they were last winter. Probably have come to
understand us better, and we them.

“Much of my time has been occupied in making maps of the several
launch trips and in writing out stenographic notes. Still, the
monotony here is dreadful, and tells on all. It certainly does on
me. Dr. Pavy and Lieutenant Kislingbury spend much of their time in
the other room, and, when in here and Lieutenant Greely absent, are
engaged in the most gloomy prognostications as to the future, and in
adverse criticisms on the conduct of the expedition. It is really
dreadful, and I sometimes think the life of an exile in Siberia
preferable to this. The absence of light without keeps us
within-doors, and the want of exercise and fresh air promotes
restlessness. Our supply of books comprises only novels and Arctic
literature. A few really solid books of history, biography, essays,
etc., are much to be desired, though, under the circumstances, I
suppose it would be difficult to concentrate one’s mind on them.

“Our experiment with calves had to be given up. All died but one.
Long took that to Dutch Island, but it would not stay. Like the
human animal, the poor thing wanted sympathy and something to love,
and followed him all the way back, notwithstanding all he could do
to restrain it. Tame foxes and tame owls have also been given up.
The former bit their keepers, the latter ate each other up. The dogs
multiply rapidly, and would increase faster, but that the pups are
eaten by the old ones. I saw the mother of a dead pup keeping
Ritenbank from swallowing it, while she hesitated whether or not she
would do the same thing herself.

“We are again building around our house with ice, which proved such
an addition last winter, and the double sashes to the windows have
been put in. I have added a side-board to my bunk and covered the
adjacent walls with paper, thus adding to the warmth. Much may be
done to mitigate the evils of this climate. The moral and social
evils are what we can not meet, or rather do not repel.”

Mrs. Greely’s birthday was again observed, chiefly by a good dinner
with wine furnished by Lieutenant Greely. Lockwood’s own birthday
was also celebrated in like manner, when he recorded the following:
“After dinner Lieutenant Greely and I had a long talk—reminiscences
of army-life, speculations as to our retreat in boats, etc. When
alone, my mind turned to the dear ones at home and the many warm
friends I had elsewhere, and to the happy days spent with them.

[Illustration: Lockwood’s Corner.]

“My corner, which is the coldest of all the corners, was improved by
covering floor and walls with paper. I also found an improvement by
adding side-boards to the bunk, and finally by converting the bed
into a regular sleeping-bag. Before this was done, I sometimes
became very chilly during the night after the fires went down. Our
lamps now burn all day. How wearisome this constant artificial light
becomes, we know from the experience of last winter. I dread it
under our present social relations. Even Lieutenant Greely refers to
these as intensifying what would otherwise not much distress him. My
daily routine is somewhat as follows: Breakfast at half-past seven,
with scarcely a word spoken by any one. Then I smoke, standing by
the stove in the cook’s room. Afterward, tailoring or some other
work. At noon, a walk to Proteus Point if possible. Afterward, read
or sleep till dinner at four. Again smoke as before. Then a few
games of chess with Lieutenant Greely or checkers with the
Esquimaux. Then read a little French or a good deal of whatever I
find most interesting. Then to my army-bunk, to sleep till next
morning, when the same routine is repeated.”

On the 20th, he made a trip to Depot “B” with some of the men and
two dog-sledges to bring down the musk-ox meat left there in
_cache_. They found the foot-ice near shore so rough that they had
to keep well out, but still they made the eighteen miles in six
hours, which may be regarded as fair traveling with dogs.

They met many bear-tracks, but old, probably made by the same
animals that visited the station. They found that these animals, and
also foxes, had found their meat-_cache_ and had done much damage,
four quarters of meat and fifteen geese having been eaten by them or
taken away. Returning next day with what remained, and taking in
more meat at St. Patrick’s Bay in still worse condition, they made
their way home over a sea of rubble-ice. To show the effects of
ice-movements, Lockwood observed, when crossing Watercourse Bay on
their return, the sledge-tracks made the day before fifty feet in
the air on top of floe-bergs!

They made a visit to some floe-bergs at the mouth of Lady Franklin
Bay to get specimens of colored ice seen there on a berg. These were
mostly yellow, but some specimens almost black. On melting, they
gave an offensive odor, and made deposits of their color. Analysis
only could determine the nature of the coloring-matter. Young ice
was measured, and found to be twenty inches thick.

Lockwood would have been glad enough to be away from that cold
region, and yet he seemed determined again to explore the north
Greenland coast, and thought that, under favorable circumstances, he
could go farther than he had already gone by at least seventy-five
miles, thereby manifesting a degree of pluck almost unique in its
character. Difficulties might arise to defeat his plans, but, these
surmounted, all his energies and hopes would be directed to
returning home. It was Lieutenant Greely’s opinion, however, that
his “farthest” would not be again reached in the present century.

On the 5th of November Dr. Pavy returned from an expedition to Carl
Ritter Bay, which he had reached by following the valley back of
Cape Lieber, as the ice-foot was found impracticable. The dog-food,
or dried fish, taken, being insufficient and poor, one of the dogs
died, and was immediately eaten by the others. The straits below
were found quite open. They killed one musk-ox, but could not bring
in the meat. On the return, so rough was the ice over the bay that
twelve hours were required to cross from Cape Baird.

The doctor urged the policy of storing provisions at Cape Hawkes for
their boat-journey, a thing easier to talk about than to do, as Cape
Hawkes was one hundred and fifty-five miles, in a straight line,
south of Lady Franklin Bay, and it would occupy a dog-sledge to go
and return at least one month. If anything was to be done in that
direction, all thoughts of further exploration must be abandoned.
The doctor predicted that a naval expedition would be sent for them
the next year, Congress having hitherto failed to provide for their
relief.

In one of his tramps to Proteus Point, Lockwood’s feet were again
frosted, owing partly to his imperfect foot-gear, and he then became
convinced that a light, flexible moccasin was the best thing to wear
in that country.

For several days about the middle of November, there were magnetic
disturbances of a pronounced character coincident with the storms
and auroras they were experiencing. Storms were always indicated by
rapid changes of barometer, but sometimes the barometer fell and no
storm followed. Auroras had recently been attended with varied
colors, which was unusual, as they had formerly been uniformly
white. A surveyor working there would find, at times, his
compass-needle almost unmanageable. Seals were seen in the most
unexpected places, one of them having been killed with a hatchet in
a tide-hole.

On the 21st, Lockwood was startled, when setting out on his usual
walk, to see what looked like smoke coming from the roof of the
house; but what he mistook for smoke was only the condensation of
vapor escaping from the house. The appearance of the smoke coming
from the chimney, and of the steam from the roof, projected as they
were on the sides of the snow-covered mountains, was very pretty.
The ice-wall around the house was a great protection, not only
keeping the hot air in, but protecting the house from the furious
blasts which would otherwise enter it, if, indeed, they did not
destroy it.

Lieutenant Greely resumed his lectures, which had before proved so
interesting. He gave one, which they all admired, on the history of
his native town, Newburyport. Israel had also assumed the _rôle_ of
lecturer on astronomy, with which he was familiar.

When Lockwood became desperate with _ennui_, he got out his old
letters and again read them, as they carried him back to his distant
home and parents and sisters. He earnestly prayed that a kind
Providence would restore him to them. This was the end of all his
hopes.

On the 30th of November Lockwood wrote as follows: “This is the day
Lieutenant Greely appointed for thanksgiving, and thankfully should
we keep it; for we have not only escaped sickness and any serious
discomforts, but we have had undoubted success in our efforts both
scientific and geographical. We have had a royal feast of soup,
beef, corn, Lima beans, pineapple-jelly, nuts, and figs.”

Contrary to his resolve, a few days later he commenced reading
novels. His feeling was that they withdraw one from one’s self,
which is something gained; but they put one up in the clouds from
which it is often painful to descend. They cause the reader to live
for a time in an ideal world, and bring him back to the stern
reality with a sense of disappointment.

On the 8th of December, Lockwood was greatly impressed by the
absence of light, and gave his views as follows: “It is now very
dark, even at noon, except when we have the moon and a clear sky.
Even on the floe, where the pure white snow reflects every bit of
light, it is now so obscure that it is difficult to see the path at
one’s feet; and even the outlines of the mountains, high above the
horizon, are very dim. A faint gleam of twilight over the south
horizon, at noon only, shows the direction in which the sun and
‘God’s country’ lie. So dark is it that I have several times
stumbled over the dogs lying outside at the door; and when in a
pathway, one has rather to feel the way than see it, requiring the
use of a lantern in going from the house.

“No wonder, then, that the moon is so highly appreciated in this
benighted region. How delightful it is, after a fortnight’s absence,
to have her with us once again! How a poet would rave over the moon
could he once know a polar winter! We have her now in all her glory,
lighting up this vast desert waste, which, covered with its mantle
of snow and ice, now becomes a thing of beauty.

“The effect of continued absence of sunlight is very marked in the
complexion of all the men, as well as in their loss of vigor. They
are as blanched as potato-sprouts in a dark cellar. Blessed orb of
light and life! One can hardly imagine the one without the other.
The moral as well as the physical influence of sunlight is very soon
seen after the sun’s reappearance, the middle of February.”

They still kept up birthdays, and the 24th was that of Saler, when
they had a feast selected by himself. The musk-ox beef was
particularly good, being young and tender, and free from the musk
flavor so common with old oxen. They were now used to this, however,
and it did not trouble them.

In the evening Lieutenant Greely brought out a few Christmas
presents to distribute, which had not been issued the previous year,
and there were some prizes of tobacco, soap, etc., raffled for. A
chromo-picture of good “King Billy” of Prussia was given to Long,
whose hair is somewhat red. The hair in the picture being of the
same color, much mirth was elicited, as Long was sensitive about his
hair, and was constantly chaffed by the men on that account.
Lieutenant Greely made a few appropriate remarks, referring to the
success of the expedition, and praying that their good fortune might
continue, etc.

The Christmas-dinner was remarkably good—one that might have been
enjoyed anywhere. The appetites of the men and of the officers were
equal to the occasion. Of late some of them had shown less appetite
than formerly, possibly because their supplies showing signs of
failing in a few particulars, the table had shown less variety. The
average weight of the men was found to be one hundred and
seventy-one pounds, Lockwood’s weight being one hundred and
seventy-six, embodying a good deal of caloric.

On the 8th of January, 1883, after repairing some damage done to the
launch by the ice, Lieutenant Greely announced his resolve to leave
for home in boats not later than August 8th, and sooner, if the ice
permitted.

On the 23d, efforts were made to cross the bay to Cape Baird, but
without success, the difficulties being the absence of light, the
intense cold, and the extremely rough ice. It was desired to open a
passage to Cape Baird, and make a depot of provisions there for use
on the retreat. Their first efforts carried these stores only to
mid-channel, but afterward Sergeant Lynn and others carried them
over to Cape Baird.

Much of Lockwood’s time was of necessity occupied in tailoring, and
he had become quite an expert. Service in the north not only
demanded much clothing, but the garments must be strong and warm.
Their supply in store being somewhat limited and not judiciously
chosen, particularly in foot- and hand-gear, all were from time to
time engaged in repairing old garments or making new. Rice suggested
a method of doubling the supply of woolen socks by cutting off the
legs of long stockings and sewing up the bottoms of the leg part.
For his proposed spring trip, Lockwood was counting upon a rig
consisting of two merino shirts, three flannel shirts, one chamois
vest, one vest made of two thicknesses of army-blanket, one woolen
Jersey, one swan-skin cloth over-shirt, one pair of merino drawers,
two pairs of flannel drawers, soldier’s trousers, cloth cap covering
head and neck with a skirt covering the shoulders, and a pair of
moccasins over heavy woolen socks—all to be worn at once, though
seemingly heavy enough to weigh down an elephant. The only clothing
in reserve was woolen wrappers and socks for the feet, and a
seal-skin “timiak” for exceptionally cold weather. Having suffered
much from cold feet, Lockwood had paid special attention to
foot-gear, but without great success. Frequently he was kept awake
most of the night from this cause. He noticed that the dogs suffered
more in their feet than elsewhere, and might be seen at any time
standing around with their feet drawn up under their bodies. The
feet and the nose seemed to be the only highly sensitive parts of
the Esquimaux dog, these being, indeed, the only parts not covered
with long wool. Lockwood never tired of watching these animals. They
were susceptible to kindness, though generally getting little of it.
They followed him on his lonely walks, and seemed grateful for any
notice or attention on his part. The young pups soon became docile
and tractable in harness, though a little more difficult to manage
than old dogs.

When the 1st of March arrived, all hands were engaged in preparing
for their spring work. First in order was the supply of their depot
on the eastern side, and Lockwood purposed leaving soon, to convey
several hundred pounds of rations to that place. As usual in such
cases, Dr. Pavy and two others of the party indulged themselves in
the most gloomy prognostications as to the future, declaring that
all idea of further explorations should be abandoned, and all their
efforts applied to depositing provisions down the straits to secure
their safe retreat in boats in August and September. Both
Lieutenants Greely and Lockwood did all they could to make a success
of this expedition, but the social atmosphere was not congenial, and
there was little enthusiasm manifested. How different would have
been this life if all had pulled together! Lockwood was impatient to
be away from this trouble and at work. If he could not go farther
than on his previous trip, he could at least try, and no man could
do more than his best.

On the 10th of March, Lockwood left with two sledge-teams of ten
dogs each for the purpose of placing supplies on the Greenland side
of the straits—he, Sergeant Brainard, and Esquimaux Frederick, with
one sledge; Sergeant Jewell, Corporal Ellison, and Jans, with the
other. After leaving Depot A, where they added to their load, they
had on each sledge about nine hundred and thirty pounds, or nearly
one hundred pounds per dog. Found much rubble-ice on St. Patrick’s
Bay, but, generally, the route to Depot B was good, and the journey
was made in eight hours from the station. Although they had a fire
in the little stove of the depot tent, all passed an uncomfortable
night, not only from cold, but from their cramped and crowded
condition. Their feet were higher than their heads, and the head in
one instance was under the edge of the damp, frost-covered canvas.
“Woolly” was found to be lame, and had to be left in a hole in the
snow-bank, with a supply of hard bread; Ellison was feeling badly,
yet said, “All right,” and insisted on proceeding. Seeing no
favorable passage from Cape Beechy, they concluded to go up to
Wrangell Bay and try the passage direct from there to Cape Brevoort.
To reach Wrangell, they had to leave the ice-foot and move out on
the straits, and soon found themselves in an awful mass of
rubble-ice like a vast plain covered with bowlders. A great deal of
chopping had to be done with the axe, and what progress they made,
was with half-loads. They encamped on the straits, and, while the
others returned for the discarded loads, Lockwood prepared supper,
succeeding only in making some ice into lukewarm tea, which, with
cold bread and meat, they hastily swallowed before creeping into
their sleeping-bags. They secured but little sleep, as may be
imagined when it is known that the thermometer registered that night
-48°. Under such circumstances, they seemed never completely
unconscious, and got up in the morning under the belief that they
had not slept at all.

Reaching the south cape of Wrangell Bay, they turned to the right
and went directly toward Cape Brevoort, still meeting with ice of
the most formidable kind, over which the heavily loaded sledges had
frequently to be lifted. Tired out, they camped at 5 P. M. in the
midst of the strait. The first thing to be done was to look out for
the foot-gear. This always had a lining of frost inside as well as
out, being wet from perspiration if not from leakage. Brainard
always changed his stockings for dry ones when he could do so, but
Lockwood and Frederick generally let theirs go, the latter from
indifference to frost-bites, and the former to escape the pain
arising from tender feet and fingers. By incasing his feet in dog-
or sheep-skin wrappings, he managed to pass the night comfortably.

Ellison, being really sick, was sent back to the depot to the tender
care of Woolly. After moving for a time over rubble, several of the
pieces of which came up to a man’s shoulders, they were greatly
encouraged by coming to a grand paleocrystic floe, whose gently
undulating surface stretched east, north, and south as far as the
eye could reach. This floe reminded Lockwood of a Western prairie,
its mounds and gullies making the resemblance more complete. As an
offset to this smooth way, they had to face an icy north wind with
the thermometer from -35° to -48°. Frederick got one cheek and a
finger frost-bitten, Brainard his face, and Lockwood his nose. Here
they put off the load, and at a run with the empty sledge returned
to their former encampment, where the tent was left standing, to
await the return of Jewell, who had gone back to Depot B to leave
Ellison with Woolly.

The next morning, packing everything on the two sledges, they soon
gained the smooth floe seen the day before, whence, detaching Jewell
for some stores at Lincoln Bay, which he was to leave at this point
and then return to Fort Conger, Lockwood, Frederick, and Brainard
proceeded across the floe with as much of the total loads as the
dogs of their sledge could drag. Coming within five miles of Cape
Brevoort, and seeing formidable ice in that direction, while toward
Newman Bay the ice was better, Lockwood concluded to head toward
that bay. They did so until 5 P. M., and then camped on the straits,
completely exhausted. During the night they had a violent south
wind, but they had campaigned too much not to be prepared for this
with tent-pins securely driven.

In the morning they made their way over pretty good floes with some
rubble, and reached at noon the whale-boat at Polaris Point, finding
the rations in her intact. Thence, following the snow slope along
the cliffs, and passing the point where Lockwood and Frederick had
spent many hours the year before in a snow-hole, they passed round
Cape Sumner through masses of ice in some places piled fifty feet
high, and finally reached the Boat Camp on Newman Bay.

Having thus provisioned the Boat Camp, they took a survey of the
routes back, and concluding that, all things considered, the one
direct to Cape Beechy was the best, returned by it with the empty
sledge, making rapid progress and reaching the west shore in just
seven hours. Notwithstanding they had no load, the passage was by no
means easy, for they had to pass over mountain-ridges, deep pits,
and gullies in the rubble-ice, where the dogs could scarcely keep
their footing. Lockwood was impressed, as often before, with the
power and endurance of the dogs. Ellison had left the depot, but
Woolly still remained, and there, also, they found Jewell, who had
been up to Lincoln Bay, where he found that the foxes had eaten up a
large part of the meat in _cache_ there.

With Woolly on the sledge, they returned to the station, meeting
Snyder and Whistler _en route_ with a pup-team and sledge, going for
Woolly. It was interesting and touching to witness the
demonstrations and delight of these youngsters on meeting their
elders, among which were the mothers of some of them.

Jewell said that, on his return to the depot, he put away his
dog-harness in one of the empty tents, and that when he awoke the
next morning he found nothing remaining but the bone buttons and the
whip-handles, the dogs having eaten everything else. Another
dog-story is recorded as follows:

“Milatook had pups the other day, and all were killed except one. It
was discovered yesterday in a very unfortunate condition, with tail
frozen hard and stiff, and legs in nearly the same condition. Some
of the men soaked the tail in water, and eventually ‘brought it to.’
It is a sad tail.”




                                XIV.
                   RESUMING A DESPERATE STRUGGLE.


On the 19th of March, fair weather came out of the north, and not
only cheered the hearts of the whole colony at the station, but
fired the desire of Lieutenant Lockwood for the new campaign, which
he had long been contemplating. After a consultation with Lieutenant
Greely, he concluded to start on the following day, or soon after.
As usual, some cold water was thrown upon his plans, one of the
critics declaring that they had experienced enough of that kind of
business; and another, that they had better be thinking of their
coming fate. But Lockwood’s reasoning was as follows: “Before I go
home, I must make another ‘strike’ on the north Greenland coast. If
the conditions of the ice are no worse, I ought to be able to
discover the northeast extremity of Greenland, and add several miles
to my latitude, although Lieutenant Greely thinks that my present
‘farthest’ will not again be reached in our day. I say nothing about
all this, however. _Act_ first and talk afterward has always been my
way.”

Lockwood was both hopeful and determined, and on the 23d he received
his final orders to the effect, that, should he not be able to reach
a higher latitude than he did before without undue danger, or should
he or any of his men break down or become dangerously ill, he was to
return forthwith. To this he replied that he knew not what might
happen, but he intended, if possible, to reach the eighty-fourth
parallel. In anticipation of his own birthday, and to honor the
explorers with a good “send-off,” Lieutenant Greely gave a dinner on
the 26th, and, thus fortified, they were prepared to move on the
following day, rejoicing.

Lockwood had two fine teams of ten dogs each assigned for his use,
and, as before, the faithful Brainard and Esquimaux Frederick were
to accompany him. Everything passed off quietly, without the
excitement or enthusiasm of the previous spring. They left the
station at 8.30 A. M., the advance sledge bearing the silk flag of
Mrs. Greely, with Brainard and Frederick the Esquimaux; the
supporting sledge with Jewell, Ellis, and Esquimaux Jans; and then
the pup-team and sledge driven by Snyder, and carrying Greely and
Lockwood. On reaching Watercourse Bay, whence they were to take back
a load of coal, Lieutenant Greely and team left them, after bidding
God-speed, and telling them to be sure and bring back the north end
of Greenland! Reaching Depot A in two and a quarter hours, they took
on two small seals left there, and passing Depot B, where they
obtained more provisions, they reached Cape Beechy at 4 P. M.—the
dogs quite fresh, but the men much wearied.

When they resumed their journey, it was snowing and the Greenland
shore invisible. They took a direct course by compass for Cape
Sumner over rubble-ice until they reached the first floe, on whose
hard, undulating surface they made rapid progress until they came to
rubble-ice again. Brainard, with axe in hand, went ahead, clearing
the way over impassable places, until the high cliff of Polaris
Promontory came in sight. Finally, both Jewell and Ellis suffering
from pain, when three miles from Cape Sumner they stopped for the
night, after making twenty miles, and all went into bags.

Moving early next morning with considerable wind, they got into bad
ice with cracks, down which some of the dogs fell and had to be
drawn up; but finally, finding a better route, reached the Polaris
Boat Camp, where, leaving some meat for the dogs when returning,
they continued on toward Gap Valley, generally over rolling floes,
and through rubble, requiring a good deal of cutting, tugging, and
pushing.

When three miles out they went into camp again, leaving Ellis to
prepare supper for all, while the others, with both sledges,
returned to the Boat Camp.

Leaving Brainard to get ready the alcohol to be taken from the
whale-boat, they kept on along shore to the foot of the cliffs and
the _cache_. Here they found the snow-slopes much worse than on
their last visit, but, the sledges being empty, they could have gone
along over anything except a stone wall, and even that would have
had to be very high to stop them. Fox-tracks were seen near the
_cache_, but they found it intact. The ice they had piled about it
was almost covered by the drifting snow. The contents of the
_cache_, about one thousand pounds in all, were put on the two
sledges, and soon after they went down a snow-bank so steep and hard
that the sledges took entire command, though all hands tried to hold
them back; but the dogs keeping out of the way, no harm was done.
This was at Cape Sumner, whence they returned to the Boat Camp.
Here, taking on the things prepared by Brainard, they returned to
the tents. After supper some hours were spent in getting ready the
rations for from twenty to forty-eight days. Jewell and Ellis were
both complaining; otherwise, every thing looked very promising.

On the morning of the 30th, it was clear overhead but cloudy around
the horizon, and a slight snow was falling. The loads were about
eleven hundred pounds to each team, but the dogs did admirably, and
good speed was made, the ice being covered with a very light depth
of snow. At the mouth of the gorge by which they were to ascend and
cross the Brevoort Peninsula, they reduced the load on each sledge
and started up this narrow, rocky, winding cañon. The snow was hard
and they were getting along well, when right before them appeared a
wall of snow, so steep and hard that Lockwood had to use his big
knife, to ascend. It was about thirty feet high. He went alone to
view the situation. A few yards beyond was a kind of ice tunnel
whose roof was about three feet high. Then came another high, steep
snow-drift with a snow-cavern alongside, probably fifty yards in
length; and also a few feet farther was found a deep pit formed by
the snow. Climbing around this and proceeding half a mile, he found
that the gorge made a bend to the east and became still more narrow
and rocky; but a side ravine offered a chance to get out of this big
gutter, up a long, steep slope of hard snow, three or four times the
height of the preceding drifts; and then Lockwood found himself on
the table-land overlooking Newman Bay.

The sledges with great difficulty gained this comparatively level
divide. The landmarks not being altogether familiar to Lockwood, he
took a long walk after supper to a distant ridge, where, seeing the
sea-coast, his way became perfectly clear. It was a lonely and
dismal walk, and the ridge seemed to get farther away as he
approached it. After more than two hours’ absence he returned to the
tents, crawled in alongside of Sergeant Brainard, and was quickly
lulled to sleep notwithstanding the snoring of Frederick. The horrid
sound issuing from his bag was as loud as a brass band at a circus.

The process of getting breakfast was to be preferred to that of
getting supper. When a man went into camp, after a toilsome day of
travel, and had helped to pitch tent and unload the sledge, it was
hard, while covered with frost, with cold and perhaps wet feet, to
chop ice and meat, and handle cold metal.

After an uncomfortable night, with the temperature down to -45°,
they started again. Proceeding several miles, they reached a narrow,
winding ravine, and finally a gorge, which they followed until they
came to the head of the wide Gap Valley, and thence to the
sea-coast. Turning east, they continued on a few hundred yards, and
were then stopped by the ice-wall, which crowded so closely to the
shore that the sledges could not be hauled through. Lockwood and
Frederick pitched the tent, while Brainard went ahead with the axe,
and, after much hard work, made a passage about one eighth of a mile
long through this place. They managed to worry through with half the
load by three o’clock, and, leaving Brainard to get supper, Lockwood
and Frederick went on with half the load for about one and a half
miles. The route beyond the bad place was excellent. Dropping the
load, they returned to the tent by four o’clock. Jewell came along
later, he and Ellis complaining again of their difficulty in keeping
up with the sledge when it went faster than a slow walk.

While approaching the cairn at Repulse Harbor, on the 1st of April,
Brainard’s sharp eyes discovered the site of the English depot of
rations, which contained Lieutenant Beaumont’s sextant, an English
flag, a cooking-lamp, old clothes, and some foot-gear. The road
before them was excellent, and they made good time, soon passing the
route of the preceding year, which reached the coast just east of
Repulse Harbor.

On coming near Drift Point, they were better able to see the
northern expanse outside the ice-wall which lined the coast and had
interrupted the view. Lockwood saw a good deal of young ice
interspersed with holes, and leads of open water. The main pack
beyond seemed permeated by leads of what had been quite recently
open water. Dark, misty “water-clouds” were seen everywhere
northward. The young ice extended along shore in both directions as
far as they could see, and out from shore a hundred yards or more.
Beyond it was the polar pack, broken into small floes and
rubble-ice, which had a glistening green appearance, as though
recently pushed up by the grinding of the fields about it; all this
was very surprising.

They made their way over the snow-slopes of Drift Point and beyond
until the near approach of the cliffs on one side and the ice-wall
on the other brought them to a halt eighty miles from Fort Conger.
Here they encamped with everything, having come thus far in six
days.

The ice-wall along here was from forty to fifty feet high. Outside,
there was a good deal of ice lately formed, with smooth floes. They
passed on near the foot of the bluffs, to see if there was any way
of getting along the cliffs, making their way between the ice-wall
and the foot of the steep slopes of the bluffs with great effort.
The _débris_ of stone, etc., from the cliffs above made the route
almost impracticable for a sledge. Before reaching Black Horn
Cliffs, they were obliged to find a route along the top of the
ice-wall, and thus got a short distance along the bottom of these
vertical cliffs. But now, from a fissure in the cliffs above, came a
steep drift of very hard snow, slanting down to the water at its
foot. To scale the cliffs by means of this drift was dangerous, as a
slip would inevitably have taken one directly into the water.

By cutting steps in the snow they gained a considerable elevation,
but, on looking round a point of rocks, the height beyond was so
much greater and worse than they expected, that they could not
proceed. All along shore was the crack of open water about a yard
wide, with young ice beyond, through which a stone or fragment of
ice might be thrown. Dense water-clouds appeared in many directions.
They returned to camp, and, after enjoying some tea, Lockwood gave
Jewell the tidal rod to make observations, while with Brainard he
started out again, this time to the south and up a stream-bed, at
whose mouth they were encamped, hoping to find a route back of the
cliffs overland. They soon found themselves in a ravine with high,
rocky sides, and encountered a steep snow-drift. Beyond was a small
hole in the snow, which seemed to be a cavern or grotto formed of
snow and ice, and probably running down to the bed of the stream—if
that may be called a stream which has no water. Beyond this were
exposed rocks under foot, and they saw ptarmigan-tracks, where the
birds had used their wings in getting down a snow-drift. Finally,
they came to a branch ravine from the southeast, the main stream
leading off toward the south. They turned up the branch, and kept on
for a while, when the high rocky sides seemed to come to a formation
of ice like a glacier, a hundred feet high, at least, and very
steep. The crest was perpendicular. The route thus far was difficult
yet practicable, but it was clearly impossible for a dog-team to
haul an _empty_ sledge up this place, and yet it was the only place
where there was anything else than an inclined plane of rocks. The
glacier was covered with snow, but in many places the ice could be
seen cropping out, the snow being only a thin covering. Some
ice-grottoes were also seen. They clambered up the rocks to the
left, and found themselves on a stony plateau. Off to the east was
an elevated ridge or knoll, toward which they traveled about a mile
and a half. On gaining it, the barometer showed an elevation of
thirteen hundred feet. Toward the south was a chain of mountains
running east and west, through the western extremity of which the
main stream-bed they had ascended seemed to break, about six miles
from the sea. The branch appeared to end at the glacier; but to the
east of it the land sloped north and south, and formed a
surface-drain which, running east, soon narrowed into a gorge, and,
bending to the north, reached the sea just west of Rest Gorge, as
well as they could make out. At the bend was a large formation of
ice or snow.

They returned to camp at 3 P. M., and found every one there walking
vigorously up and down to keep warm, or, rather, to keep from
freezing, the thermometer marking -48°. Jewell left his beat every
few minutes to note the height of the water on the tide-rod. There
was now nothing else to do except to get into the sleeping-bags, and
this in cold weather always involves a change of foot-gear. At six
o’clock Brainard had prepared supper, and shortly after, the advance
sledge-party was trying to sleep. Jewell kept on taking observations
until after eleven, when he caught the high tide. It was a severe
ordeal, but he preferred to do it, without assistance, as it was
much better for the record.

Brainard complained of want of sleep, and Lockwood’s rest was much
the same as usual—an uneasy, oppressed feeling of being half asleep
and half awake; every few hours getting broad awake, and wondering
if it were time to rise, or how much colder his feet would have to
get before freezing. Having decided to examine the main ravine
running south, Lockwood started from camp before eight, with
Brainard, Frederick, and Ellis. On reaching the branch, he and Ellis
continued south, and the other two went up the branch. Continuing
along between the high, rocky sides of the ravine, with abundance of
hard snow under foot, but some bad snow-drifts, they found a very
good sledge-route. After a while, they came to a huge formation of
snow, filling the whole breadth of the ravine, and sloping up—in one
place by a very easy ascent—to the west bank. Gaining this, they
continued on and reached a ridge some twelve hundred feet high,
which commanded a view of the sea, and of the valley to the south as
far as the mountains. The valley seemed to grow wider and deeper as
far as the mountains, through which it broke from a southwest
direction. No break or defile of any kind offered an outlet to the
east. Beyond the east bank was a wide plateau covered with stones,
and about four miles from the sea. After taking a good survey of the
country, they turned back toward the camp. Brainard and Frederick
joined them some time afterward, and reported that they had cut one
hundred and fifty-two steps in the side of the glacier to get up,
and found that the branch extended a short distance beyond, but that
a vertical ledge of ice some twelve feet high presented itself
afterward, and that, on getting beyond this, they found themselves
on a plateau covered with bare stones. Brainard thought the route
utterly impracticable, and went no farther. He afterward said that
they might be able to get round to Rest Gorge in two weeks, with the
sledges and loads, by taking the sledges to pieces, and carrying
them and the loads piecemeal over these obstructions. The young ice
seemed to be getting thicker, and they began to think they might get
around the cliffs after all. They had some tea and “pap,” and began
to calculate how many days it would take to reach Cape Bryant.
During the afternoon, a way for the sledge was cut through a low
place in the ice-wall, a short distance west of the camp, and two
days’ rations were also deposited in a _cache_ on the hill. A slight
wind blew during the day, and by eight o’clock all were in their
sleeping-bags again, excepting Jewell, who kept up tidal
observations until ten, securing a very satisfactory set, two high
tides and the intervening low tide.

Thermometer during the night -43°. After breakfast, Brainard went
down to the tide-gauge, and, coming back, reported that the rising
tide had widened the crack a little, but that he had fixed it by
chopping snow blocks and throwing them into the water. Being
unwilling to risk everything on the young ice, thinking that it
might break through, Lockwood put the five sacks of pemmican on the
sledge, and leaving the tent, etc., and the supporting sledge-party
packing up, he, Brainard, and Frederick started on. They reached the
ice with no trouble, and, proceeding out from shore one or two
hundred yards, turned to the east and went a short distance when,
Frederick seeming to think the ice all right, Lockwood sent Brainard
ahead with the axe, while with Frederick, having thrown off the
load, he proceeded back for the rest of the stores, so as to take
all on together. They had nearly reached the shore, when suddenly
Lockwood saw two or three of the dogs in the water, and knew from
Frederick’s tones that something had happened. The ice was moving
out from shore, and they saw no way of getting off. Lockwood called
for Jewell, and then leaving Frederick and his team to find a way to
shore if possible, started on the run to get within hailing distance
of Brainard. He was speedily overtaken by Frederick and the
dog-team, the dogs going at a fast gallop, and Frederick laying his
whip about them in all directions. Lockwood proceeded to find some
place to get ashore, but there was none, except at a little
promontory of rubble-ice, in front of the camp, and about two
hundred yards from the tide-gauge. Elsewhere up and down, as far as
they could see, was a continuous belt of water, every moment getting
wider. The ice had a motion toward the east, as well as out from the
shore, and thus kept in position a small cake of ice by means of
which Lockwood got on the promontory, and then directed the
movements of the dog-sledge which now came along. On the way back
they stopped and threw the pemmican on the sledge again, the ice
being perfectly smooth and hard. They first saved the dogs, pulling
them up one by one, and then, the little ice-cake seeming to keep
its position, a bridge was made of the sledge, and all the pemmican
saved. The ice continued to move out from the shore, until up and
down as far as the eye could reach was a wide belt of open water.
Before they left, it was in many places between one and two hundred
yards wide, and the ice at the same time moving toward the east.
They got ashore at eleven o’clock, and by 12.30 the sledge-tracks,
which had been opposite the tidal rod, were opposite the camp, a
distance of two hundred yards. While the sledges were being packed,
a seal made his appearance and eyed the party curiously. The guns
were not convenient, and he was not disturbed. Many water-clouds
were seen to the north at this time, and the whole polar pack seemed
to be on the move. They were all grateful for getting out of the
trap so well. Referring to their living on the moving floe,
Frederick made signs to suggest their eating the dog-pemmican;
certainly this would have lasted a long time had they not frozen to
death in the mean while, which they would have done very soon, as
they were without sleeping-bags or alcohol.

There seemed nothing to do but turn about and go home, and yet
Lockwood was extremely averse to the idea. The overland route looked
well-nigh impossible, or something at least that could not be
accomplished in time to allow them to reach the farthest of 1882.
Lockwood’s orders directed his return in case this contingency
should arise, as well as in case of any “signs of the disintegration
of the polar pack,” or in case he became incapacitated for rapid
travel. He walked up and down and thought of it for some time, both
Brainard and Jewell having declared that there was nothing else to
do but return. At 12.30, the teams being all ready, they turned
toward the west. As they came near the slopes of Drift Point a very
disagreeable south wind with drifting snow was met, which continuing
to get worse, their cheeks and noses began to suffer, and therefore,
at about two o’clock, they halted and pitched the tents, driving the
pins first, and raising the tents afterward. By this time it was
blowing almost a gale, and, the thermometer being very low, the tent
was tied up, and they prepared to weather it out, Lockwood having a
severe headache, which added to his tribulations.

The whole of April 5th was passed in the sleeping-bags, giving all
hands an opportunity to meditate on the _delights_ of an Arctic
sledge-journey. The time was spent in sleep, or in trying to keep
warm and sleep at the same time. During the day Lockwood counted up
the exact number of rations remaining, and, still bent on his dream
of the eighty-fourth degree, calculated that, if they could get
around overland to Rest Gorge in five days, they could yet go to the
farthest of 1882 and a few days beyond, provided the traveling was
not worse than the previous year. He announced his intention
accordingly. Brainard and Jewell were not hopeful, but willing to do
their best in attempting it. One great obstacle was the lame and
crippled condition of both Jewell and Ellis. The signs of
disintegration in the polar pack, Lockwood proposed to disregard.

The wind continuing to blow, it was noon before they started off
toward the east to reconnoitre; but, prior to this, Lockwood went up
on the high ground back of the tents and saw a great deal of open
water. Some time after starting, he stopped the sledges and went up
on another elevation to reconnoitre, feeling that, if he went on and
anything happened, his responsibility would be heavy, from his
disobedience of orders. From this point could be seen a belt of open
water running along shore, in both directions, for miles. In no
place was it less than two hundred yards wide, and from that it
increased to four and five hundred. Westward from the vicinity of
Repulse Harbor, it extended in a lead, growing wider and wider, all
the way across the straits, apparently to the vicinity of Lincoln
Bay, where it seemed to swing round to the north. This lead was
upward of five miles wide in the middle. Whether there were other
leads south of it, between Newman Bay and Beechy, could not be
determined. In the polar pack to the north were several small leads
and a great many dark water-clouds. The ice was again noticed moving
rapidly to the northeast. Beyond Cape Bryant, he supposed the ice to
be intact, as in 1882, but around the cape, north of Britannia, they
had then traveled on new ice, and, going out on the polar pack at
Cape Dodge, just this side of the farthest, had traveled on it for
several miles. The condition of this route now could not be known,
of course, but what they had seen made the prospect very
unfavorable. The signs of disintegration were unmistakable, and
Lockwood therefore determined to turn back once again. Near this
spot he remarked a very curious stratified floeberg. It was about
forty feet high, and a dozen or more horizontal lines were very
plain. The weather had now cleared up beautifully, and they were
soon at Repulse Harbor. Here they left a short notice of their
defeat in an English cairn, and, taking Beaumont’s sextant, the
English flag, etc., on the sledge, continued on their way to the
mouth of Gap Valley, where they went into camp, and remained long
enough to take a set of tidal observations.

The observations here were very satisfactory, and were kept up by
Jewell for more than twelve hours. Brainard, with Ellis and the two
teams and drivers, advanced the heaviest part of the loads _en
route_ nine miles to the shore of Newman Bay. Lockwood and Jewell
remained in camp, and the former found it extremely monotonous,
having nothing to do but to prepare supper. The only way to keep
warm was by constantly moving about, and, as a cold wind was
blowing, this in itself was not comfortable. The observations were
very trying to Jewell, continued as they were long after the rest
were in their bags.

On the 8th of April, they suffered more than usual with cold. The
sleeping-bags, frozen stiff, were a long time in thawing out after
they got into them. Dark water-clouds were seen along the northern
horizon, although elsewhere the sky was bright and clear. One,
particularly noticeable, to the northeast and near shore, looked
like a huge cliff in a fog. They also noticed a movement in an
ice-hillock some distance off the coast. It changed its angle to the
east during their stay, and suggested open water across their route
before reaching Cape Beechy. They left camp at ten, and found the
traveling very good—rather improved by the late storm. Jewell and
Ellis began to suffer again, and the latter was carried on the
sledge several miles, the loads being very light. They soon reached
the middle of the divide, and then the loads left on the shore of
Newman Bay, making very fast time through the gorge, though the
sledges had to be let down the snow-slopes and drifts by ropes.
After stopping some time to take on everything, they proceeded
slowly and reached the Boat Camp, and soon after Cape Sumner, where
they stopped to make tidal observations, Lockwood and Brainard
remarking what a particularly dreary and dismal place it was, and
wondering if they should ever see it again. It brought to mind the
trials and tribulations of the previous spring. Yet, in spite of
those trials, the novelty of everything, and the imperfect
equipment, that expedition was a success; and this one,
notwithstanding their experience and the completeness of their
arrangements, a failure. “Oft expectation fails where most it
promises.” Lockwood felt thankful that they had escaped from the
ice-pack, and from passing the forty-eight hours of the recent storm
upon it, living on the pemmican until finally frozen to death; but
the sense of defeat was predominant. They passed a tedious, cold
afternoon, but enjoyed a good dinner, having now an abundance of
rations of all kinds. It warmed them up and put new life in all.
Jewell saw, during his observations, a white owl flying overhead
toward the east.

The morning of the 10th was bright, clear, and calm. They noticed a
stratum of misty clouds, supposed to be water-clouds, hanging along
the foot of the cliffs on the Grinnell Land shore, and extending
from above Cape Beechy northward indefinitely. After passing through
several bands of rubble-ice with great labor, and yet without having
to double up, they found the tracks made on the outward journey, and
followed them continuously. This saved a great deal of time in
chopping and picking out a road. About noon they suddenly
encountered a very cold south wind. It seemed to come out of Devil’s
Gap, Polaris Promontory, and as usual carried along a lot of fine
drifted snow, continuing during the day. Their heavy loads made the
dogs travel at a slow walk, otherwise, no doubt, both Jewell and
Ellis must have been left behind or carried on the sledges. They
went into camp on a hard snow-drift.

After an uncomfortable night, with the mercury at 45° below zero,
they left camp and followed the old trail, as on the previous day,
jolting along with little difficulty in the rubble-ice, the dogs
doing admirably, bracing themselves to the effort at bad places,
like so many men.

They reached Depot B at 2.50 P. M., and pitched the tents, this
making the tenth time that Lockwood had crossed the straits above
Fort Conger.

The traveling was tedious and slow, but they reached Depot A at
noon, stopping only half an hour, and arrived at Fort Conger in the
afternoon. Everything there was quiet as the grave. “General Grant”
was the only one, man or beast, that knew of their approach and came
out to meet them. Even when they passed the windows and reached the
door, no one saw or heard them, and Lockwood walked in on Lieutenant
Greely like a ghost, and simply said: “Well, I’m back again; open
water at Black Horn Cliffs.” Some of his further reflections were to
this effect:

“Do I take up my pen to write the humiliating word _failed_? I do,
and bitter is the dose, although it is now a week since first I
tasted it. My return here, the inaction after two and a half weeks
of activity, and the monotony, not to mention the disappointment of
Lieutenant Greely, make it fresh as when first mixed. I tried
yesterday and to-day to induce Lieutenant Greely to let me go out
again, but he says this is our last year here, that I still have
last year’s work to fall back on, and, above all, that it is not
_prudent_. I have a scheme by which I could travel four days beyond
the farthest of ’82, and get back here in forty-four days, leaving
April 21st and returning June 3d—that is, provided an overland route
around the Black Horn Cliffs can be found, and provided the
conditions beyond are no worse than last year. My proposal was to
take the two teams, the two Esquimaux and Brainard, five sacks of
pemmican, one tent, two sleeping-bags, etc., and forty-four days’
rations for the party. The five sacks would last the dogs
twenty-three days, after which about eight dogs of the twenty would
be killed one by one, and thus the remainder fed on the return. We
should have to make long marches, it is true. Perhaps the refusal is
for the best, and I still have the country southwest of the head of
Archer Fiord to operate in; but I am reluctant to give up this
scheme for passing 83° 24′.” Everything at the station was very
quiet, and much as when they left, except that a party had been sent
for the boat at Thank-God Harbor.




                                XV.
                       ACROSS GRINNELL LAND.


While the disappointment which attended the late expedition was very
great, it did not make Lieutenant Lockwood unhappy or morose. He was
only convinced, perhaps, that when the ice and snow and storms,
minions of the North Pole, undertake to play the game of April fool,
they do it very effectually. The absence of so many of his
companions from the station had a depressing effect upon his
spirits, but as usual he prepared the report of his last journey,
and duly submitted it to Lieutenant Greely, all the while suffering
from the severe rheumatic pains which invariably followed his
exposure to severe cold. Many of the men were complaining, and the
weather outlook was not encouraging, and yet, after consulting with
Lieutenant Greely, Lockwood fixed his mind upon an exploration up
and beyond the Archer Fiord. His idea was to go west, at least as
far as the English had gone along the northern shore of Grinnell
Land, feeling that he could hardly fail of finding something of
interest, and would perhaps make important discoveries. Indeed, he
might be able to determine the coast-line on the west. As usual, he
wanted the company of Sergeant Brainard and Esquimaux Frederick, and
would be content with one dog-team and supplies for thirty days,
with a proper supporting party for two days.

His spirits now became better than they had been, caused chiefly, as
he confessed, by the glorious sun; and yet he could not refrain from
thinking of home, and again resorting for comfort to his old family
letters, which he had so frequently read before.

His late failure had been a disappointment to himself as well as to
Lieutenant Greely and the men. Some of them seemed down in the mouth
and gloomy, and, by way of cheering them, Lieutenant Greely informed
them that he intended to leave Fort Conger on the 5th of August, or
as soon thereafter as the ice would permit. The personal relations
of Dr. Pavy and Lieutenant Kislingbury with Lieutenant Greely and
himself were not what they should have been, and, instead of getting
better, these relations seemed to grow worse. Could he not have gone
abroad on these fatiguing journeys to escape such companionship, he
would have felt utterly desperate. He certainly would cheerfully
take any risks during the summer than longer endure the existing
personal troubles. Lieutenant Kislingbury’s only thought seemed to
be that a sledge-party should be sent down to Littleton Island to
have the ship leave her supplies at Cape Sabine, therein merely
reflecting the latest opinion of the doctor.

The start for the western trip was made on the 25th of April, 1883,
with two sledges, each drawn by ten dogs and carrying about one
thousand pounds of rations for thirty days. They moved along the
south side of the harbor over very soft and deep snow, through which
the dogs labored, yet made their way with full loads. On getting
near “Sun Land,” however, the snow became abominable, and the
traveling was as bad as they had ever experienced. After trying for
some time to go ahead, but sticking incessantly, they turned short
off to the left, and after a great deal of work reached the shore,
Brainard _en route_ falling down a crack, and Lockwood feeling
convinced that his feet were frozen, as all sensation had left them.

Reaching Black Knob Point, where there was a tent, they found it
blown down. After some delay in repitching it, they started overland
toward Sun Bay, through soft and deep snow, and soon afterward
reached Stony Cape, where they encamped, all the party being very
much fatigued.

Resuming their march, they found the snow not particularly deep, but
with a light crust, not quite hard enough to bear, which made the
traveling fatiguing. They stopped to rest every hour, the weather
being really too warm for comfort, so that Lockwood actually longed
for the cold and hard work he had experienced in north Greenland.
They reached Keppel’s Head in three hours, and found that _Mr._
Keppel had a very stony face, and not a handsome head by any means,
being a lofty promontory and precipitous mass of rocks, very grand
and imposing. In two hours more they reached Hillock Depot, and
stopped to get some corned beef left there by Lockwood in June of
the preceding year, the English rations left there having all been
eaten by foxes.

On reaching Depot Point, they transferred everything from the
supporting sledge and sent it back to the station, afterward getting
along with the whole load very well. The high, steep cliffs on their
right threw their shadows almost across the fiord, and kept them out
of the glare of the sun moving along the northern horizon.
Fox-tracks constantly appeared. These tracks were found everywhere,
and yet it was but seldom that the animals themselves were seen; and
in thinking of their habits, Lockwood wondered if they laid up in
store their surplus food against the days of want. A tame fox kept
at the station would always take what was offered; but, when the
ice-wall was pulled down, a large supply was found which Mr. Reuben
had abandoned on regaining his liberty.

Greatly enjoying the pleasant weather, after finding some Esquimaux
relics, and making a vain effort to surmount a glacier, they finally
reached the head of Ella Bay, where, after some delay in finding
freshwater ice, and snow hard and deep enough to pitch the tent,
they went into camp. Lockwood and Frederick then took the team and
empty sledge, and proceeded up a little water-course a few miles.
Found less ice and more stones than they expected, but, having
ascertained that they could advance up the valley with some extra
labor, returned. Numerous fox, ptarmigan, hare, and musk-ox tracks
were seen, but no game. Brainard became permanent cook, as the
difficult business of making observations devolved entirely on
Lockwood. The cliffs about here were grand, at least three thousand
feet high.

Lockwood was disappointed in getting equal altitudes of the sun for
longitude (time), the lofty cliffs shutting out the orb of light on
each side of the meridian; and yet he had camped away out, a mile or
two from the cliffs, in order to avoid this difficulty. This was one
of the annoyances he had frequently experienced. After lying awake
for hours, or taking his sleep by short cat-naps with one eye open,
and running out in order to catch the sun at the right time, and all
this after a tiresome march, it was very provoking to have “some
miserable cliff” lift its ugly head right in his way. To get the
local time _well_, it was necessary to take the sun’s altitude some
hours before noon, and then catch the precise instant of the same
altitude in the afternoon, the sun being nearly on the meridian at a
time midway between the times of the two observations. This middle
time needed certain corrections, and then, the watch or chronometer
being regulated to Greenwich or Washington time, the difference of
time, or longitude, was known. The little streams occupying the
valleys (or cañons, as they should be called) of this Arctic country
are utterly insignificant compared with the depressions themselves.
A great, ditch-like break in the country, from two to five miles
wide and ten to thirty miles long, the sides of which are vertical
walls rising thousands of feet, may be the bed of a little brook
that in summer-time can be readily waded, and at other times of the
year can hardly be seen under the universal mantle of snow. It was
one of these that they followed in its windings. Here and there they
would encounter very deep snow, and the sledge-runners would stick
on the beds of stone, requiring all their efforts to get under way
again. In about an hour they came to a long, level area, indicating
Lake Katherine, which Lockwood had previously discovered and named
when up near here in the launch, and then the view up the valley was
unbroken as far as the glacier. Its terminal face could be clearly
seen, looking like a little wall of ice three or four feet high,
upon which one could readily step. Back of this the surface gently
ascended until lost in the snow-covered mountain-side far beyond.
The whole thing looked like a mass of barber’s lather, flowing
slowly down a deep ditch. For some hours, Lockwood and Brainard both
thought there would be no trouble in getting sledge and dogs up the
_little_ face to the undulating and gradually ascending surface
beyond. After proceeding some distance on the lake, Lockwood stopped
the sledge, and with Brainard went off to the right, ascending a low
ridge that ran parallel with the lake and between it and the high
cliffs on the north side of the valley. They found the top to be
four hundred feet high, and beyond was a wide ravine running down to
the bay. There they saw the tracks of three musk-oxen that had
evidently passed along on their way toward the fiord; also many
tracks of foxes, ptarmigan, lemming, and hare. Probably, the chief
reason for seeing so few animals, though so many tracks, was that
the birds and animals (excepting the musk-ox) are all pure white in
color for three fourths of the year. One might _look_ at a hare or
ptarmigan a few yards away and yet not _see_ it. The lake called
Katherine was found to be three or four miles long. At its farther
end, the ground was quite bare of snow in places, and everywhere the
snow was hard and thin, so that they went along very rapidly. Every
half-hour, they thought, would bring them to the glacier, but the
longer they traveled, the farther the glacier seemed to move away.
When only a short walk from the glacier, as Lockwood thought, he
stopped the sledge, and with Brainard went on ahead. The _face_
seemed much higher than they had supposed it, but it was only after
walking a mile that they realized what it was—a wall of ice,
straight up and down, stretching a mile across the valley from side
to side, and nearly two hundred feet high.

After surveying this wonderful object, they returned to the sledge
and pitched the tent, seeing no way of proceeding farther; and there
they remained a day or two to get a good look at the surroundings
before deciding upon the proper course to pursue. A decided fall in
the temperature was quite noticeable, due, doubtless, to the
proximity of the glacier. They got to sleep after a while, and
during the day took a good rest, getting up in the afternoon. The
twain went again to reconnoitre, leaving Frederick to hunt, or amuse
himself in any other way he chose. They went to the glacier-wall
again, and followed along its foot to the south side of the valley.
This wall was beautiful and imposing. From the top, one third of the
way downward, the ice was of a charming green color, and looked like
glass; below this came a white surface, in which small stones were
numerous imbedded in the ice, with here and there streaks of a
brownish color, like chocolate ice-cream mixed with vanilla. A close
approach showed that it was earth. At the foot of the wall, probably
concealing a “terminal moraine,” was an undulating bank of snow, and
over the upper edge of the wall hung wreaths of drifted snow that
looked like the icing of cake. The ground for some distance out was
strewed with blocks of ice and stone of all imaginable shapes and
sizes. On reaching the corner of the glacier, a similar wall was
seen extending up along its flank, abutting against an inclined
plain of immense bowlders and masses of rock, the _débris_ from the
cliffs above. The angle thus formed was full of large blocks of ice,
many recently detached from the wall of ice. Traveling along the
flank proved so difficult that they took to the incline and
scrambled for some time over immense masses of rock and snow, often
across deep cracks and openings concealed by the snow covering them.
After gaining an altitude of several hundred feet, they reached
something like a terrace formation, from which they overlooked all
the lower part of the glacier. It presented an undulating and
gradually rising surface, extending up the valley fifteen or twenty
miles, or more. Just opposite to them, a branch glacier came in from
the north through a gap in the mighty cliffs. The slope of this
branch in places was very precipitous, showing great rents and
fissures. The surface of the glacier was free from snow, except,
here and there, in what seemed little depressions in the ice. There
was no way of climbing upon the glacier, much less of getting the
sledge and dogs up. It would simply have been ascending a precipice
of ice two hundred feet high. To get upon it had been their original
intention, although Frederick went through a pantomime at the time,
which they did not exactly understand, expressing how a sledge would
go faster and faster, and finally shoot over the edge like a
waterfall. Whether he ever had had such an experience in Greenland
he did not say, but he would never have had it more than once.
Seeing no way of getting on or along the glacier, except with the
greatest labor, Lockwood proposed to Brainard that they should
ascend the cliffs and get an outlook from the top. It did not seem
very far to the crest, and accordingly they started, but a more
severe climb they had never had, and hoped never to have again. It
was a very steep incline of rocks and snow all the way up. When the
barometer showed an elevation of twenty-five hundred feet, Lockwood
found himself on a ledge of rocks from which he could get neither up
nor down for some time. Beneath him was a steep surface of frozen
snow, falling on which he would have gone down-hill like an
avalanche. Brainard had inclined more to the left, and, by following
the side of a steep gully full of ice, had got ahead of him and out
of sight.

Finally, Lockwood reached what had long seemed the summit, and
stopped to rest. Presently Brainard came in sight, and said the top
was about a mile off. They then started together, walked over a
gradually ascending surface like the top of a vast dome, covered
with hard frozen snow and ice, and very smooth and slippery, giving
them frequent falls, and at 4 A. M. reached the summit and viewed
the country around for many miles. Being cold, they did not stay
long—only long enough to take bearings by compass of several distant
mountains to the south, snow and ice-clad peaks with many glaciers
between. To the west the country was less broken, and seemingly was
a lofty surface of snow and ice. They traced the glacier near their
camp about twenty miles toward the west-south-west, when it, and the
valley containing it, came to an end in a high mountain-ridge. This
wonderful feature of nature possessed great interest for Lockwood.
The face of the barometer gave an elevation of the mountain or cliff
on which they stood of 5,050 feet above the sea-level. As their tent
was only three hundred feet above tide-water, their climb had not
been a small one. They descended the mountain readily, although they
had to use hands as well as feet all the way down, in some places
carrying with them a land-slide of earth and stones.

They were constantly deceived as to distances and heights. A
headland on the fiord looked but a half-hour’s travel away, yet it
took two or three hours to reach it. So these cliffs, which looked
from below like an easy climb, proved the highest and steepest in
that benighted region. They got back to the tent after thirteen
hours of as hard work as they had yet experienced, and completely
tired out. They took meridian observation for latitude, and then
enjoyed a hearty meal of ptarmigan killed by Frederick during their
absence.

On the 2d of May, they left their beds and had breakfast at about
midnight. Found it snowing and unpleasant. Saw little else to do
than retrace their steps to Ella Bay, and thence proceed around to
Beatrix Bay and try to get inland from that place; spent the day,
however, in further reconnoitring, as Lockwood did not wish to leave
before night. Brainard went over to the northeast corner of the
glacier, but found no way of proceeding in that direction, and,
after carefully studying the surroundings, Lockwood could see no
means of getting on even with packs. Spent most of the day in taking
observations, etc. Occasionally they heard a noise like thunder,
caused by the falling in of sections of the great wall before them,
more formidable than any to be seen in China. The ground at the foot
of the wall was only the bed of a stream with blocks of ice, and
here and there a big bowlder. Everything being packed up and ready,
they started down the stream again, examining several deep breaks in
the cliffs to see if there was any prospect of _flanking_ the
glacier by means of one of them, but without success. There was no
way of getting up even a short distance, except by leaving dogs and
sledge behind and taking to the knapsacks, which was not then to be
thought of.

They got along without event and reached their old camp after
midnight, pitching the tent farther toward the north side, in order
to see the sun when ready to take observations. Shortly after
getting in, Frederick laid his whip down for an instant, and the
promising dog Barker gobbled up all except about six inches of the
butt-end in much less time than it takes to mention the fact. The
praises of Barker had been sung ever since his birth, and this was
only one of many of the tricks by which he proved his proficiency.
Frederick quickly made a new lash, however, and _gave it_ to Barker
on the next march.

On the 3d of May, as they pushed their way onward, they took a
series of angles and paced distances to get at the height of the
tremendous cliffs near at hand. The result gave an altitude of
forty-one hundred feet, which was almost vertical, the _débris_
extending a third of the way up, and not being quite so steep. They
then followed the north shore to Record Point, and thence took a
straight course for the head of Beatrix Bay. The cliffs were so
grand that Lockwood never tired of gazing at them, wondering how
they were first formed, and thinking what tremendous force of nature
had scooped out the awful chasm that comprised the fiord. These
walls, high as they were, were only one half or one third of the
height of the great snow-covered elevations back of and beyond them.

The appreciation of the grand in this region was frequently marred
by fatigue and hunger, and so it was on the present occasion,
Lockwood being glad enough when, at half-past one, they reached the
head of Beatrix Bay. In the valley which they now entered, they
concluded to spend another day. This one, like nearly all the
valleys in this region, was simply a cañon, a narrow, ditch-like
formation, walled in by steep, high cliffs. It was occupied as usual
by a very insignificant stream, the successor of some mighty mass of
water or ice which had originally hollowed out the great gorge.
This, and the head of Ella Bay, were the farthest reached by
Lieutenant Archer, R. N., who explored the fiord named for him to
find out whether it was simply a _fiord_, or a strait or channel, as
the Polaris people had asserted it to be. His Mount Neville,
thirty-eight hundred feet high, Lockwood looked for in vain as a
regular head to the valley, and finally fixed it as one of the
cliffs which, a little way back, rose slightly higher, to a dome.
Archer was a day making the ascent. Lockwood and Brainard walked
about four miles up the valley, and saw its termination nearly six
miles beyond, when they retraced their course to camp, greatly
disappointed in seeing no game, except two or three ptarmigans. The
valley seemed practicable for the sledge, and so, after considering
one or two narrow and rocky gorges which came in from the west, they
determined to follow it to its head (north-northwest), and then seek
farther a route in the direction desired, which was west or
southwest. As they proceeded, the weather became bright and clear,
and the mercury was only 2° below zero. They passed up the valley,
leaving in _cache_ for return two days’ rations. The dogs were in
excellent condition, and, in spite of stones, went along very well.
There was some ice in the stream-bed, and of snow quite an
abundance. Above the farthest reached the day before, a small lake
was discovered—a level expanse of snow with ice beneath. The lower
part of the valley had two distinct elevations, the stream-bed, a
very easy grade, forming one, while along the stream extended broken
terraces, termed shoulders, which from the cliffs projected out on
either side, sometimes beyond the middle of the valley, which was
from one to three miles wide. The breadth decreased as they
ascended, and after several miles it was but a few hundred yards
wide. At this point, they suddenly came to a place where the valley
seemed to run out, the whole breadth being a mass of rocks. Good
traveling was seen beyond, however, and, after working an hour
doubling up (taking half-load at a time), they got over, and shortly
afterward the real end of the valley was reached. They then turned
short off to the north, and, going up a steep, rocky ravine, about
midnight pitched the tent for further survey of the scene on the
morrow.

From this camp a low-looking “hog-back” was seen to close in the
head of the valley. They determined to ascend this and get a look at
the country, it seeming certain that the _big_ sledge could go no
farther. After making some coffee as strong as it could be made, and
drinking about a quart each, to bolster up their spirits, the twain
again started out, leaving Frederick to crawl into his sleeping-bag
or keep warm as best he might. They proceeded north up a rocky
ravine about a mile, and then came to a level plain stretching
northward, some half a dozen miles farther, to a line of cliffs
running across which seemed to indicate another valley or lake. To
the right were two or three high, dome-shaped elevations, and to the
left was Mount Easy, so called, afterward, on account of the ease
with which they ascended it, and in contradistinction to Mount
Difficult, the last they had ascended. They soon came to a pretty
little lake—Lake Carolyn—only a few miles long. This they crossed,
and, in places where the snow had been blown off, they could see
down through the beautiful transparent ice, seven feet in thickness,
even to the stones on the bottom of the lake near the shore. This
lake had an elevation of eleven hundred feet above the sea. In three
hours from camp, they reached the top of the mountain, an elevation
of 2,720 feet, and had a good view. To the south the country was
very high, and several glacier-walls came into view, probably
connections of the glacier above Ella Bay. The Henrietta Nesmith
glacier, the Garfield range, and the United States Mountains, were
plainly seen, and also the depression in which lay Lake Hazen. Snow
and ice in every direction. The cliffs to the north of the camp were
very conspicuous, but whether along a valley or lake they could not
make out. They stayed on top two hours, and then descended the south
side of the mountain through a deep ravine filled in places with
snow-drifts, and lower down with stones and bowlders. However, they
went down very rapidly, and got to camp in two hours. The cliffs to
the north seeming to extend to the west, Lockwood decided to visit
them and take that route. The only other feasible route was by way
of the ravine they had descended from the mountain-top.

Shortly after midnight of the 7th, Frederick had the dogs and little
sledge ready, and, with nothing upon it but the shot-gun, hatchet,
and telescope, they all started. The dogs were irrepressible, and
took the little sledge over the rocks in a way calculated to cripple
all hands, for they had to run alongside and hold on to the
upstanders to keep up. Occasionally a runner of the sledge would
catch under a bowlder and bring the sledge to a sudden stand-still,
the immense strain of the strong dogs threatening to break it. On
reaching the lake, all three of the men managed to crowd upon the
sledge, and the dogs went at a rapid trot over its smooth, level
surface. Beyond Lake Carolyn was a ravine leading toward the river,
and there the dogs took to a gallop, and in an hour they reached a
rocky height overlooking a long, wide valley walled in on the north
side by high, precipitous cliffs, and on the south by heights of
even greater elevation, but not so steep. There seemed no way,
however, to get down. The water-course from the lake here became a
narrow gorge blocked with large bowlders, the spaces between which
were full of soft snow. It was not inviting, but they tried it, and
in an hour reached the river-bed, the descent being most laborious.
Here they found themselves only four hundred feet above the
sea-level, and, turning to the right, went down-stream in a
northeastern direction, the barometer constantly showing that they
were going _down_-stream. _En route_ they passed over several small
lakes formed by expansions of the stream. In many places the ice was
very thick and beautifully transparent. Seven miles from Rocky
Gorge, where they entered the river, they suddenly saw four
musk-oxen. Frederick being very anxious for slaughter was allowed to
go after them, while Brainard remained to watch the sledge and dogs,
and Lockwood went off to the right to take some compass-bearings.
After a while he heard a shot from Frederick, and saw one of the
animals fall. The others did not seem at all frightened, but stood
by their dead comrade until Frederick _drove_ them away by throwing
stones at them. The dogs became greatly excited, and, going to where
the dead game lay—a second ox having been killed—they gorged
themselves with the entrails until there was danger of ruining their
own.

Having returned to the camp, Lockwood now projected a special trip
westward of twelve days, and prepared his outfit as follows:
Shelter-tent, sleeping-bags, axe, sextant, etc., telescope, shot-gun
and ammunition, medicine, cook’s bag, rubber blankets, small lamp,
knapsacks, snow-shoes, rations for three at forty-five ounces each
per day, and one sack of pemmican for dogs; total, 328¼ pounds. The
_large_ tent was left standing with the big sledge alongside and the
American flag flying from the upstander. They got off at an early
hour on the 8th with the dogs in excellent condition. Much work was
required to get over the rocks, but after that they proceeded
satisfactorily until near the valley. This was found to be quite
wide for a region where everything of the kind was more like a cañon
than a valley in the ordinary sense. Its width was two or three
miles, or perhaps in some places four, and the general gradients of
the stream-bed (Dodge River) were very slight, perhaps thirty feet
to the mile. Narrow, deep cuts in the cliffs and high ground around
indicated tributary streams.

Frederick having shot a hare, and gathered up the other food, they
proceeded on their way, traveling now over thick, clear ice and hard
snow, with now and then patches of stones. The valley seemed to come
to an end some fifteen miles up-stream, a range of high hills
running directly across it.

After various tribulations in exploring a side gorge, at midnight on
the 10th of May the party resumed travel up the valley. The
condition of the sledge-runners rendered it necessary to reduce the
weight to the least amount possible. This doubtless pleased the
dogs, for the driver had to restrain their ardor. Leaving the sledge
to pursue its way along the base of the hills, Lockwood ascended a
considerable elevation and obtained a good outlook over the country.
He was very agreeably surprised to find at the farther end of a gap
up stream an apparent prolongation of the valley in the same general
direction. On either side of this prolongation was a range of low
heights, while the intermediate surface looked very level—so level
that he took it for a long lake. To the left, just outside the
heights on that side of the valley, he could see at intervals a
glacier-wall, the north boundary of a great _mer de glace_. About
twenty miles distant, the valley seemed again to be shut in by a
range of hills, but over the tops of them, and at a great elevation
on the distant horizon, he saw what seemed to be a snow-bank. This
he made his objective point. Passing onward through the gap, they
came to a long and picturesque lake which was named Lake Nan after
an interesting niece; and coming to a place near the end of the
valley, a break in the low heights to the left revealed the glacier
they had before seen. Its surface was very distinct. Extending to
the south a few miles, it soon reached an elevation that formed the
horizon in that direction. It seemed a vast undulating surface, and,
as was afterward discovered, is the backbone of Grinnell Land. The
wall of the glacier near which they camped presented a vertical face
of solid ice 140 feet high. At intervals they heard the sound of
falling ice—small fragments which became detached and dropped to the
base. The altitude of this camp above the sea-level was found to be
1,240 feet, and of Lake Nan 920 feet; that of their last camp was
685 feet, and of the first camp in the valley, 420 feet.

Passing onward, they crossed several small lakes close along the
wall, with brooks emptying into them from the north. In a few hours
they were on the divide, the surface to the north having more slope
than that on the other side. The summit gave an elevation by
barometer of 2,610 feet, about 400 feet higher than where they left
the wall. They had an extensive view to the east, and could see
Dodge River as far as they had explored it, also Mount Easy and the
country adjacent. To the southeast, south, and southwest, was seen
the glacier, which was named after Agassiz. It formed the horizon
for half a dozen miles in these directions. All the ice-capped
country and glaciers seen from the former camps were found to be
connected with, and to form a part of this one glacier. Toward the
north, the country had comparatively little snow. Presently they
came in view of a mountain-peak toward the northwest, not many miles
distant, which was recognized as Mount Arthur, the farthest point
reached by Lieutenant Greely during the previous year. Away beyond
it were seen very distinctly the United States and Garfield
Mountains. Just to the west of Mount Arthur, they discovered a large
lake, which Lockwood named Lake Fletcher. They were now on a surface
rapidly sloping to the west. Some miles distant in this direction
appeared a broken range of cliffs and mountains, and between their
stand-point and these mountains was a wide valley, connected by a
stream with Lake Fletcher, and a small lake, close to the Chinese
Wall, which they called Lake Harry, the latter having an elevation
of 1,320 feet. They crossed Lake Harry, and beyond it came to
another called Lake Bessie, having an elevation of 1,630 feet, and
covered with deep snow.

Reaching the cliffs to the west, they found the descent exceedingly
precipitous and rugged. No other passage offered than that through a
gorge which was filled with ice and hard snow, whose surface was
almost perpendicular. As this was the only passage, they went into
camp to devise ways and means. Next morning, Lockwood attached all
the ropes he had, including dog-traces, to the sledge, and while he
rode to guide caused the others to ease down the sledge.
Unfortunately, the rope was too short, and those at the top let go.
Gravity carried the sledge and rider down the foot of the slope, now
somewhat reduced, with fearful rapidity, till they brought up
against rocks covered with snow, fortunately without serious damage.
The other men and dogs got down as best they could, the former
digging footholds as they progressed.

Further descending the cañon, they came to another glacier
stretching entirely across their way, and, as it seemed impossible
to surmount it or the walls on either side, they came to a halt and
enjoyed a night of rest. The next day they pushed on, though
troubled with snow-blindness, and, overcoming the obstacle of the
previous day, crossed a lake and encamped on its farther end. On the
following day, after passing through a gorge, the outlet of the
lake, between high cliffs, they were surprised to see a number of
floebergs similar in every respect to the floebergs of the east
Grinnell coast. At the same time they found the water to be _salt_,
and saw the fresh tracks of a bear. These facts convinced Lockwood
that they were near the western sea, probably at the head of a
fiord. This soon became still more apparent. Here they also saw
another glacier coming in some miles west of the last. They crossed
a crack of open water, formed by the tide, and found themselves on
well-recognized floe-ice, quite level but covered in places with
deep snow. Ahead of them, twenty miles distant, on the opposite side
of the fiord, was a bold headland, and toward this they now directed
their course. This fiord, which Lockwood named after Lieutenant
Greely, separated at its head into two bays. These he called, after
Greely’s daughters, Adola and Antoinette. The latter bay they were
now crossing, while they bore away to the north. It had become very
foggy, and was snowing and blowing hard. When some miles out they
crossed other bear-tracks, and finally reached the cape for which
they had been striving. Here the south shore of the fiord bent off
toward the west-southwest being very wide and walled in on all sides
by steep cliffs broken in a few places by branch fiords or bays.
They encamped at the cape on the 13th, had supper, and soon turned
in to sleep and fast as long as possible, or until the storm abated,
as the party was now reduced to what they called a starvation
allowance. There was nothing to do but to make observations when the
sun appeared.

The mouth of the fiord at the north side was found to be about forty
miles off, but the snow was deep and soft, and they could not
attempt it without rations, all of which was extremely provoking.
The sun became dimly visible through a snow-storm, looking like a
grease-spot in the sky; but, notwithstanding, observations were
attempted for latitude and longitude, and many compass-bearings were
taken. At times everything was shut out of sight excepting the
nearest cliff. Brainard feared they would have a very hard time in
getting back, and Frederick evidently thought he was a long distance
from Fort Conger, seeming rather “down in the mouth.”

Soon after breakfast on the 15th, Lockwood and Brainard started to
ascend the cliffs near by, the weather having partially cleared.
They did so by means of a ravine opposite the camp, and had hardly
reached the top before the snow began to fall again, and the wind to
blow from the east; but, notwithstanding, they saw a large glacier
to the south twenty or thirty miles away, and another to the
northwest at about the same distance. The first was apparently an
offshoot of the great “Chinese Wall” already mentioned. They saw
also a lofty range of mountains far to the north, running generally
parallel with the fiord. The cliffs to the west shut out the mouth
of the fiord, and, before they could get far enough in that
direction to see over them, the coming storm obscured almost
everything. These cliffs were 2,140 feet high by the barometer, and
almost vertical. The driving snow now became very uncomfortable,
and, after going three miles westward, they concluded to return. _En
route_, they found a number of fossils of what seemed to be trees,
snakes, or fishes, Brainard being the first to notice them. They
also saw a ptarmigan, an owl, and some snow-buntings, these being
the only living objects observed. Reached the tent after six hours’
absence, and found Frederick tramping around in the snow, not
knowing what to do with himself. After supper, all three of the
party with the sledge and dogs went an hour’s journey toward the
opposite shore of the fiord, ten miles away. The sky was partially
clear, and they got a very good view down the fiord, the telescope
bringing into view another cape (Cape Lockwood). Between that and
the cape on the north side (Cape Brainard), they failed to see any
land, though they examined long and carefully with the telescope.
The fiord between those two capes was very wide. Several branch
fiords, or what appeared to be such, were noticed. Cape Lockwood
seemed to be on the farther side of one of these, or on an island.
The country on both sides of the fiord was very elevated, that on
the north side much broken, and that on the south, away from the
fiord, apparently an ice-clad surface rising into immense, dome-like
undulations against the horizon.

After a meager breakfast, they started on their return, finding the
snow very deep and soft. The effect of short rations on the dogs was
noticed. They saw two seals lying on the ice, which Frederick tried
hard to shoot, but in vain. Lockwood was especially anxious to get a
seal, for it looked as if they would have to kill one dog to save
the remainder. After much trouble for want of food, they resumed
their journey on the 17th, verifying at various points the
observations that had been previously made in regard to the great
ice-wall and the lake over which they had already passed.

On reaching the end of the lake, they began the ascent of the
ravine. The snow at the head of the ravine was very soft and deep,
and they had hard work to get through it. Arriving at the big
snow-drift which they had descended with so much difficulty and
danger, it became a question how to ascend, but they managed it by
first cutting some steps and getting the dogs up, and then,
attaching them by long lines to the sledge below, men and dogs
together pulled the load up the almost vertical face. The party went
into camp at the old place, and decided to kill one of the dogs, yet
very reluctantly, Frederick opposing it. Brainard had suggested
White Kooney, but Frederick named Button, a young dog. Button had
eaten up his harness that morning, and this decided his fate. He was
shot by Frederick, and soon the carcass was skinned and presented to
his brethren. Old Howler at once seized a hind-quarter, but the
others did nothing more than smell the meat. They walked around it
in a reflective mood, debating whether to yield to their hunger or
to their repugnance. When the party awoke next morning, nothing
remained of poor Button but some of the larger bones.

On the 18th, Lockwood and Brainard ascended a neighboring mountain
and got a look at the country. The ascent was easy and they gained
the top in a short time; altitude, 2,008 feet. From this point they
could see the “Chinese Wall” stretching off to the southwest forty
miles, over hills and dales, as far as the glacier south of Fossil
Mountain, although Lockwood could not recognize that particular
glacier. The glaciers at the two ends of the lake, near Greely
Fiord, were readily seen to be offshoots of the greater one, whose
surface toward the south could be seen for several miles. In that
direction, Lockwood took the bearings of several ice-capped
mountains, one, as he thought, identical with a very high mountain
seen to the south from Antoinette Bay. The “Chinese Wall” had the
same general aspect everywhere—a vertical face of pure white or
green ice upward of two hundred feet high, and extending across the
country in a fashion he could liken to nothing else.

From here Lockwood made a short excursion by himself to Lake Harry,
discovered a number of other small lakes, and obtained the altitude
of several localities. He returned to camp only to find the dogs in
a bad way for food, and a scarcity for himself and men. Resuming
their course the next morning, after the dog Howler had performed
the remarkable feat of stealing a piece of meat when it was cooking
on the alcohol-stove, they passed many of the localities they had
seen before, but in some cases hardly recognized them on account of
the flying snow. Making two marches in twenty-four hours, they
reached their first camp, and found the tent blown down, but the big
sledge in its position, with the American flag flying over it as
gayly as if in a pleasant and genial clime. The dogs were gratified
with a good feast of pemmican, and the men themselves found it
delightful, once more to have a full supply of food.

Their next move was for Archer Fiord, by way of Beatrix Bay and
Record Point. They crossed another lake, where, as once before, they
could see the bottom through ice that was seven feet in thickness,
having revisited the north side of Musk-ox Valley, which was
separated from the lake by a very low and narrow divide. Dodge River
was seen bending off to the northeast toward Howgate Fiord. The
surroundings were very picturesque, but barren and desolate in the
extreme. They saw no signs of game, and even the poor, stunted
vegetation of the region was wanting. Rocks and snow, with stretches
of bare ground, composed the prospect.

The lake alluded to above was about twelve miles long—a considerable
sheet of water—and, no doubt, in summer would be an interesting
place to visit, as places go in the Arctic regions.

After camping they proceeded along to the east of Murray Island, the
weather cloudy and calm. Depot Point was revisited, to look for the
English rations, but nothing found.

Having killed a seal, they took the meat and blubber along, and
camped about ten miles from Bulley’s Lump, where they had a good
feast of meat and liver. The latter was greatly relished, Brainard
making it into many dishes.

On the 24th, they enjoyed their breakfast at midnight, Lockwood
calling it a real _midnight mass_, as it was a black mass of
seal-liver, English meat, corned beef, potatoes, and hard bread, all
cooked together in one stew which was very good, notwithstanding its
miscellaneous character.

The comments of Lockwood, in regard to the expedition, and how
matters were at the station, were as follow:

“No such word as ‘failed’ to write this time, I am thankful to say,
but the happy reflection is mine that I accomplished more than any
one expected, and more than I myself dared hope—the discovery of the
western sea, and hence the western coast-line of Grinnell Land. I
have now the rather ponderous task of preparing a report, making a
map, and writing out this journal from my notes. Tidal observations
have been taken at Capes Baird, Distant, and Beechy, simultaneously,
showing that the tides arrive at these places in the order named.
This is very singular, as the previous expeditions into these parts
established (?) the tides as coming from the north. This agrees,
however, with the order of their arrival at Cape Sumner, Gap Valley,
and Black Horn Cliffs, where I took observations in April. No more
musk-ox meat left; it ran out on the 20th inst., and hunting-parties
sent out April 25th saw nothing. I surmised as much, from the
absence of game on my trip, though Brainard did not agree with me.
Two seals have been shot, but only one secured.

“I find the social relations of our room not improved—rather worse
than better. Dr. P., though he shook hands and asked me several
questions as to my trip, relapsed into silence, which he seldom
breaks. Lieutenant K. had but one question to ask. I often contrast
ours with the pleasant relations of the English officers when here,
and think how much happier we should be in following their example.
As it is, I soon relapse into _ennui_ and apathy. A sledge-journey,
with all its trials, is preferable to this. I view those ahead of us
with indifference, as it will rid me of this forced association.
Another winter would render me a maniac, or put me under a cairn.

“The spirits of the men seem good. The sun has revived them. Merry
groups may be seen at any time on the sunny sides of the house.

“How often do I think of home, which now seems to me like a series
of pictures or objects long since seen! how often of my dear father,
whom may a kind Providence spare for many, many years!

“Both Brainard and I lost a score of pounds weight on our late trip;
but we are rapidly regaining our avoirdupois. My appetite is
frightful, and nothing comes amiss. I want to eat every three or
four hours. Fortunately, we have a supply of musk-ox beef on hand,
having killed three recently aggregating four hundred pounds, to
which are added many water and other fowl daily brought in. There
was felt at one time some apprehension that our resource in this
respect had disappeared, and fears were entertained of scurvy. The
men seem to have fared so well that their appetites have become
dainty. One would suppose that pork and beans were not staples at
our army posts.

“Israel makes my _farthest_ of the last trip, latitude 80° 47´,
longitude 88° 29´. Hence my explorations extend over 2½° of latitude
and 38° of longitude. Have plotted my western journey, and find that
my farthest carries me far off the English map. I took latitude and
longitude observations at every camp, and also frequent
compass-bearings; to reconcile all these is a task.

“Rice has taken a photograph of my corner, where I do all my work
and also sleep.

“Have been reading the authorities on glaciers, and regret I did not
inform myself better before going out. But perhaps that Chinese Wall
will make up for my short-comings.

“Those rheumatic pains I had a year ago have returned and trouble me
much. I must be moving again soon.

“Several of the dogs, becoming mangy, have been shot. Poor old
‘Howler,’ whom we left on the ice-floe, hoping he would recover and
follow us, was found dead near the same place. Oh! the hours of
misery I have spent in sleeping-bags, kept awake by that howling
brute—howling, perhaps, just because another dog looked at him! But,
for all his howlings and stealings, the ex-king was a good worker
and did his duty, and that should be all required of any one, man or
dog. May he rest in peace in the happy hunting-grounds of the canine
race! Frederick, I presume, will put on crape for him.”




                                XVI.
                        PREPARING FOR HOME.


Hardly had Lieutenant Lockwood reoccupied his _corner_ long enough
to get thoroughly rested and warm, before we find him hard at work
again and ready for any emergency. At the request of Lieutenant
Greely, he undertook a task in which he himself feared that he
manifested more zeal than discretion. Dr. Pavy, the natural history
custodian of the expedition, having failed to render reports of the
collections, or properly care for them, was relieved soon after
Lockwood’s return from the west, and the department was transferred
to Lockwood. With very little aid from the doctor, he made lists and
secured the specimens from further injury, the men having shown much
industry and zeal in adding to the collection. In the mean time,
Fredericks, who was a saddler by trade, rendered good service by
making for Lockwood and the men seal-skin boots, which were of great
use; and he also made himself useful by overhauling the
sleeping-bags and making new ones for the contemplated boat-voyage
to Littleton Island at a later day. Snyder had also made some
wearing gear for use on board the relief-ship.

“What a change for us all,” wrote Lockwood on the 3d of June, “if we
ever return home! And how much to talk about, and how much to hear!
Just two years ago, I left Baltimore on the Nova Scotia, to join the
Proteus at St. John’s. Open water is reported in the straits near
Cape Baird. How eagerly we watch for any change that may effect our
release!”

On the 22d of June, a party was sent up the Bellows for game and
returned successful, having killed eight musk-oxen, one seal, and a
few geese, all of which were duly brought in. Many waterfowl and
ptarmigans were brought from other points; and then followed a grand
dinner in honor of Dr. Pavy’s birthday. To show the social relations
of the officers, Lockwood says, “The only remark at dinner was a
very sage one by myself, viz., that the sun was now on his way
south, to which Lieutenant Greely assented.

“The men all busy and all cheerful. Lieutenant Greely remarked that
it did not look as if the ‘gloom which their coming fate cast over
the spirits of the men’ was quite as deep as Lieutenant Kislingbury
thought it to be. Another day gone,” wrote Lockwood—“another day
nearer the end of our stay here! A miserable, gloomy day it is too.
Snow, or snow mixed with rain, all day, and last night it blew a
gale from the right direction to clear away the ice—north-east. I
think myself now in excellent condition for a hermit’s life, having
had two years’ experience of a life not very dissimilar.”

On the 3d of June, Lockwood made the ascent of an immense “hog-back”
north of the station. Hog-back was the term used by the English to
designate the oval-shaped elevations so common in this region, being
neither mountain nor table-land, but immense undulations which, with
more or less slope, rise three, four, or even five thousand feet
above the sea-level. He was the first to ascend this one, and did so
to view the country northwest of it, which he desired to explore. It
was the highest of a series of ridges, half a mile or so apart, each
just high enough to suggest the idea of its being the genuine top,
but showing another beyond still higher. He pressed on, frequently
resting, and finally _did_ reach the top, and saw, beyond, the
United States Mountains in the distance. The view from this
elevation, more than half a mile above the sea-level, was superb.
The straits seemed one solid mass of ice. The Greenland shore and
Archer’s Fiord were in full view. The whole land was made up of
mountains.

The 4th of July was celebrated by a game of baseball, in which
Lieutenant Greely took part; also the Esquimaux, but they confined
themselves to running after the ball. A good dinner followed, to
which Lieutenant Greely contributed four bottles of Sauterne; but
the doctor declined the wine, and made a hasty meal. They also had a
rifle-match. Several of the men donned white shirts and other
“store-clothes,” metamorphosing themselves completely, flannel
shirts, with trousers in boots, being the usual costume.

On the same day Lieutenant Greely issued an order directing Dr. Pavy
to turn over to Lieutenant Lockwood all the medical stores,
journals, and collections, the former having declined to renew his
engagement, which had expired. On the 11th of July, Lockwood started
with Brainard on an exploration toward the northwest with a view of
reaching, if possible, the United States range of mountains. They
carried an outfit weighing one hundred pounds, or twenty-five pounds
for each man at the start, as Henry and Biederbick were to help them
with the impedimenta for one day and then return. They went without
sledge or tent, and carried only blanket, sleeping-bags, a small
lamp, and a few pounds of food, with instruments, snow-shoes, etc.
They soon reached the top of the hog-back beyond “Sugar-Loaf,” and
afterward the true hog-back Lockwood had visited before, finding it
2,700 feet high. Thence they kept a north-northwest course toward a
prominent glacier in the United States Range, moving about parallel
to North Valley Creek, which empties into St. Patrick’s Bay. After
traveling fourteen miles they camped—that is, selected as smooth and
sheltered a spot as could be found, made some tea, spread out the
sleeping-bags, and crawled in.

Henry and Biederbick left the next morning evidently well satisfied
to forego the pleasures of this trip. Their departure rendered it
necessary to reduce the load somewhat, which was done by leaving
behind the snow-shoes and rubber spread, trusting to luck to find a
bare spot for their sleeping-bag. After tramping through much wet
snow alternating with mud and stones, and getting their feet soaking
wet, they came to two deep gorges close together, each occupied by a
considerable stream of water. They crossed these and ascended a dome
beyond, three thousand feet high, and thence came to a still larger
stream whose gorge was one thousand feet deep. Here they stopped for
the night after a tramp of twelve miles. The next morning the sky
was overcast, with barometric indications of a storm; but they
continued their way with reduced loads, having only one day’s food
left. Following the stream northwest a few miles, they crossed it
and ascended a high elevation, from which the United States range
could be very distinctly viewed, and then came to the conclusion
that they had gone far enough.

With the telescope they could see distinctly, about twenty miles
away, the walls of the great glacier, and its face ten miles wide.
In fact, the whole range was full of glaciers. The country
intervening between them and the glaciers seemed comparatively
level. At noon they started back, and did not stop until the
camping-place of the night before was reached. Thence, after a drink
of tea and something to eat, abandoning their sleeping-bags, they
made for their first camp, where had been left the rubber spread and
one extra bag. The traveling was execrable, but they reached Fort
Conger on the 14th, hungry, tired, and decidedly used up.

On the 24th, preparations began for the proposed boat-journey toward
the south on which they would start when the ice would permit.
Lockwood, in obedience to a general order, prepared to take no
clothing except what he wore, and the few pounds of his baggage
would consist of his journal and other papers. He felt depressed and
low-spirited, and totally indifferent as to the risks they were to
encounter.

The straits were reported clear of ice below Cape Lieber on the
26th, but the bay near by was still full, though with many leads.
Every preparation was made to leave on the 1st of August, if
possible, or as soon after as the ice would allow. The men fiddled
and sang, and seemed in joyous spirits; and the hilarity was kept up
by the dogs Ritenbank and Ask-him having a terrible fight, resulting
in victory to the latter. The probable consequence was that Ask-him
would now be king. Ritenbank went about with his head down and tail
between his legs, a dethroned and friendless monarch. The usurper’s
reign, however, was likely to be a short one, as, on the party’s
leaving, the dogs would either be shot or left to starve to death.

The 5th of August arrived, and the ship was the only thing talked
about. Some of the men reported smoke down the straits, but it was
soon found to be only water-clouds or fog. In the midst of these
excitements, Lockwood gave expression to the following feelings: “As
the time for moving approaches, I feel a singular apathy. If we had
plenty of fresh meat and more good books, I could stand another
winter here.”

Soon after, heavy winds from the south making great changes in the
condition of the ice, active preparations were made for leaving.

Lockwood writes: “I don’t feel as though I was going away, much less
toward the south. Have felt more stirred up on beginning a
sledge-journey.”


  TABULATED STATEMENT OF THE DISTANCE TRAVELED TO LOCKWOOD ISLAND.

                           Distance traveled.      Time.
                        Adv     Tr    Add    Tot      Adv       Tr       MPH
                          Miles—Geographical.     Hours.    Geo. M.
  OUT.
  Fort Conger to Boat    48     67    157    224      21½       28¼     2·23
    Camp
  Boat Camp to           36     86     25    111      18¾       44⅓     1·92
    sea-coast
  Sea-coast to Cape     37½    103½    12    113      21½     47¹/₁₂    1·74
    Bryant
  Cape Bryant to Cape    60    118     ..    118      32      55⁵/₁₂    1·87
    Britannia
  Cape Britannia to      95     95     ..     95      39⅔       48⅙     2·39
    farthest
     Total (out)        267½   469½   194    701     133½      223¾     2·07
  BACK.
  Farthest to Cape       95     95     ..     95      37⅓       41¾     2·52
    Britannia
  Cape Britannia to      60     60     ..     60      25¾       28      2·33
    Cape Bryant
  Cape Bryant to Boat   61½    61½     ..    61½      27¼       36½     2·25
    Camp
  Boat Camp to Fort      48     48     ..     48      22½       28⅓     2·13
    Conger
     Total (back)       264½   264½    ..    264½    112⅚     134²/₁₂   2·34
  Aggregate (out and    541    734    194    965½  245¹¹/₁₂    357⅚     2·20
    back)
  Aggregate (out and    623     ..     ..    1069
    back) in statute
    miles

  Key to Headings:
    Adv: Advanced.
    Add: Additional miles traveled.
    Tr: Traveled.
    Tot: Total.
    MPH: Number of miles per hour.

The word “advanced,” both here and in the journal, refers to the
simple distance from camp to camp, and the actual time occupied in
making that distance—all stops _deducted_.

The word “traveled” includes total number of miles traveled—the
number of miles advanced added to those traveled in going back and
forth in “doubling up.” The time corresponding refers to the whole
time from leaving one camp to arriving at the next, all stops
included.

The “additional miles” refer to incidental journeys not numbered as
marches.

The rate per hour is computed from the distance and time _advanced_.

The whole statement is confined to the dog-sledge.




                               XVII.
                          HOMEWARD BOUND.


The time having arrived, the final orders were given for the Arctic
exiles to make ready for the first stage of travel leading to their
far-distant home. They were now to leave the station at Fort Conger,
and, as best they could, find their way to Littleton Island, where
they hoped to meet a vessel that would take them back to
Newfoundland. They were to depart in boats, viz., the steam-launch
Lady Greely, a whale-boat, an English boat of which they had come
into possession, and a still smaller affair, that might prove
serviceable for special purposes.

The journal kept by Lieutenant Lockwood after his departure from
Fort Conger was written in short-hand, as always while in the field,
and is a very complete record. In the following pages, only a brief
summary of purely personal incidents will be attempted, without
presuming to give the phraseology of the youthful explorer.

On the 9th of August, the little fleet pushed off from shore, laden
with the twenty-five adventurers and a comfortable supply of
provisions. They reached Bellot Island without much trouble, but
afterward encountered a good deal of ice, and, while working very
hard to get through, Rice accidentally fell overboard, which was for
him a poor beginning. The ice continued to be troublesome until the
close of the next day, when the boats were so severely nipped that
they had to be drawn up on the floe. Afterward, open water appearing
all the way across the fiord, the launch and the other boats made a
successful crossing nearly opposite Sun Bay. They reached the depot
near Cape Baird, at about 2 P. M., up to which hour, from the time
of leaving Fort Conger, they had not been able to secure any sleep,
nor anything to drink but cold water. Reaching Cape Lieber on the
11th in a snow-storm, they landed on a bluff about a mile from the
cape, where they waited for the ice to move, so that they might
continue on their route toward the south along the western shore of
the strait. The only animals seen in that vicinity were two
narwhals, fighting near the shore. The fog now became so very dense
that no headway could be made, and this gave them an opportunity to
obtain some needed rest. Their next advance was in the midst of a
severe storm of wind and snow, in spite of which they reached Carl
Ritter Bay on the morning of the 12th. The next morning, while they
had open water near the shore, they discovered ice-barriers
extending to the south as far as they could see. At this point a
young seal was killed, which was greatly enjoyed by all of the
party; but this luxury, in the case of Lockwood, was counterbalanced
by the discomfort of sleeping on shore without any protection
excepting that of his bag. He also spent several nights on a
floe-berg, where, by laying his sleeping-bag on a sheep-skin, he
slept more comfortably. From the 13th until the 20th, when the party
reached Rawlings’s Bay, it was a continual conflict with floating
ice, snow-storms, and fog, the monotony of the struggle having been
broken by an accident to the launch, and also one to Lieutenant
Greely, who had a fall into the water, from which he was rescued
without harm. At all the places where they encamped, they had great
difficulty in securing a safe harbor for the launch. Having passed
across Richardson Bay in safety and reached Cape Collinson, they
found about one hundred and twenty, out of two hundred and forty,
English rations which had been deposited there, the missing portion
having been eaten by the foxes. On the 22d they reached Scoresby
Bay, where observations of the strait showed it to be full of
floating ice; and in this vicinity they were brought to a halt by
the ice-pack near the shore at Cape John Barrow. Here the boats were
pulled up on the floe, and, as the thick sludge-ice was all around,
no open water in sight, and the supply of coal getting very low, the
prospect was gloomy in the extreme. When able to continue on their
course, the travelers were still greatly troubled by heavy fogs, and
while passing over a space of open water, abounding in floe-bergs
which could not be seen, they were in constant danger of being lost.
Notwithstanding all these obstacles, they pushed their way onward,
and in due time reached Cape Louis Napoleon, Cape Hawks, and
Princess Marie Bay, when they were again stopped by the floating
ice, and detained by the newly formed ice.

In his desire to comply with the order as to weight of baggage,
Lockwood had left his seal-skin coat at Fort Conger, but this step
he afterward regretted, as the weather continued stormy, and he was
greatly exposed to the cold. To this was added the misfortune of
having a badly fitting seal-skin boot which gave him great pain, so
that he had to resort to a pair of moccasins. When the boats were
caught in floes and detained for days, the only exercise available
was that of walking over the level floes. Some of the men were wont
to march around, under the light of the moon, singing aloud their
wild and uncouth songs. When tired of walking, Lockwood would creep
into a cozy corner of the launch, and pore over a pocket copy of
Shakespeare which he had fortunately brought along; and then, after
getting into his sleeping-bag, his thoughts would wander far away
and find expression in such words as these: “What are they doing at
home? How often I think of the dear ones there! The dangers and
uncertainties ahead of us are only aggravated by the thoughts of the
concern felt by them on my account. Most of us have given up the
idea of getting home this fall.”

On the 3d of September, while in the floe below Cape Hawks,
Lieutenant Greely held a consultation with Lockwood, Kislingbury,
Pavy, and Brainard, expressing the opinion that their situation was
critical, and that they were really working for their lives. One of
the suggestions was that the launch should be abandoned, and further
progress made in the smaller boats along the western shore of the
strait; but to this, Greely and the majority objected, still hoping
that they might yet be able to reach Littleton Island through a lead
or over the young ice. On the 6th the hunter Jans killed his fourth
seal, and was rewarded by a drink of rum. After five more days of
travel, and while approaching Cocked-Hat Island, there was a great
excitement caused by the report that one of the men had heard the
barking of dogs, whereupon guns were fired and a flag displayed; but
all the commotion ended in nothing. The tides were contrary, the
small boat was abandoned, and the outlook was very gloomy. The
faithful Esquimaux, Frederick, who had latterly been somewhat
unlucky as a hunter, now came to the front by killing a seal that
weighed six hundred pounds, receiving the usual drink of rum. On
this occasion Lockwood mentioned that he swallowed a cupful of the
seal’s blood, and found it somewhat tasteless. On the 5th of
September, the party after great labor came abreast of Victoria Head
and Cape Albert, and while drifting along on the floe the American
flag was hoisted over the launch, and the fire under the engine was
put out to save coal, Lockwood enjoying a little needed sleep. On
the 7th they came in sight of the coast extending from Alexander
Harbor to Cape Sabine, and the impossibility of proceeding in the
launch becoming apparent, it was decided to resort to sledge-travel,
two of the sledges to carry a boat each, and both of them to be
drawn by the men. When they were fully prepared for moving, it was
found that one of them weighed 1,700 pounds and the other 2,100
pounds. Owing to the various difficulties which soon beset the
travelers, they were obliged to abandon one of the boats, whereby it
became necessary to retrace several sections of the journey for the
purpose of bringing on the extra supplies, thus adding greatly to
the fatigue of the men. Lockwood now expressed his doubts as to
whether he would live to write out his notes, and also his fears
that the floe upon which the party then were, might take them down
into Baffin’s Bay. Not only were they at the mercy of the floe, but
the currents were contrary, sludge-ice abundant, and their supply of
food reduced to seal-blubber, bread, and tea. At one time, strange
to say, their position in the straits was directly north of
Littleton Island, and nearer the Greenland coast than that of
Grinnell Land. It now seemed to Lockwood that there was nothing
ahead of them but starvation and death, and yet the men kept up
their spirits in a manner that greatly surprised him. One of the
floes upon which they had drifted for many days, when found to be
cracking in one or two places, caused the party to move upon another
nearer the shore, and in a short time the floe previously occupied
was entirely broken up. On the 29th of September, the floe on which
they were floating, finally touched another toward the west, and
that another connected with the shore, by which means they were
enabled to reach the land, very thankful to be in a place of
security once more. The locality was really a rock forming a
promontory between two glaciers, and thought to be about thirteen
miles directly south of Cape Sabine. To that place a reconnoitring
party was at once sent, but the cape could not be reached on account
of open water near it, and the party was compelled to return. In the
mean time, arrangements were made for building out of stones and ice
the necessary huts for protection during the coming winter, should
it be their fate to remain there. While this work was progressing,
it was decided that the daily rations would have to be reduced.
Lockwood expressed the opinion that they had only three chances for
their lives: first, the chance of finding an American _cache_ at
Cape Sabine; secondly, a chance of crossing the straits, here
thirty-five miles wide, when their provisions were gone; thirdly,
the chance of being able to kill enough game for their support
during the winter. A second effort was made by Rice and a party to
reach Cape Sabine, which was successful. They not only brought news
about the wreck of the Proteus, but also a copy of the Army Register
for 1883, in which appeared Lockwood’s name as a first lieutenant.
Rice also succeeded in discovering the English _cache_ with two
hundred and forty rations, the _cache_ left by the Neptune in 1882,
and the stores brought from the wreck of the Proteus in 1883, all of
which information was hailed with delight by the party. Among the
stores left by the Proteus, a newspaper slip was picked up, from
which was gathered the news that President Garfield had died; that
the Jeannette had been lost; and that serious apprehensions were
felt in the United States about the fate of the Greely Expedition.
This latter intelligence gave Lockwood great pain, seeming almost
prophetic, except in the remark “lying down under the great stars to
die!” and induced him to make this record: “This article gives me
great pain, because of the alarm and sorrow which must be felt by my
dear father and mother and sisters on my behalf. Should my ambitious
hopes be disappointed, and these lines only, meet the eyes of those
so dear, may they not in thought add to my many faults and failings
that of ingratitude or want of affection in not recording more
frequently my thoughts regarding them!”

One of the results of the trip made by Rice to Cape Sabine was the
selection of a spot, between the cape and Cocked-Hat Island, for a
home during the approaching winter. Here, officers and men alike
laboring, a new hut was built, which was forthwith occupied by the
party, all the supplies being at once brought from the camp south of
Cape Sabine. The place where they now found themselves established,
Lieutenant Greely called Camp Clay, in honor of one of the party—a
grandson of Henry Clay—who had been attached to the expedition until
it reached Lady Franklin Bay, whence he returned home on account of
his health. As soon as the new hut was occupied, the announcement
was made that six of the party were on the sick list; but shortly
afterward, and notwithstanding the deplorable condition of affairs,
Lockwood recorded the following in his journal: “We are all now in
comparatively high spirits, and look forward to getting back to the
United States with a great deal of certainty. We shall have to live
on half-rations or less until April, and there will be shortness of
fuel. Many hardships are obvious, but we all feel sound again.”

On the 23d of October, twelve of the party went from Camp Clay upon
a visit to Cape Sabine, and, while some of them opened the English
_cache_ at the south side of Payer Harbor, Lockwood built a cairn
there and deposited under it, among other things, the records of the
expedition, with a note in lead-pencil to the following effect:

“_October 23, 1883._—This cairn contains the original records of the
Lady Franklin Bay Expedition, the private journal of Lieutenant
Lockwood, and a set of photographic negatives. The party is
permanently encamped at a point midway between Cape Sabine and
Cocked-Hat Island. All well.

                          “J. B. Lockwood,
            “_First Lieutenant Twenty-third Infantry._”

On their way back to Camp Clay, Dr. Pavy met with an accident to one
of his feet, and, while most of the party went on, Lockwood and
Ellison remained behind to look after him. When night came on, they
lost their way, stumbling and floundering over the rubble-ice until
overcome by fatigue and hunger; but were revived by a limited mutton
stew on their arrival at the camp. One of the results to Lockwood of
his Samaritan conduct was an accident to one of his knees, which
gave him trouble for several days, and prevented his being as useful
as he desired in contributing to the comfort of the party. It was
about this time that Lieutenant Greely declared his intention of
reducing the rations, all assenting, so that they might last until
the 1st of March; and this fact, added to the discovery that some of
their meat was far more bony than it should have been, caused some
consternation. Cold, dampness, darkness, and hunger continued to be
their hourly and daily portion, the allowance of food being only
about one fourth of what they actually needed.




                               XVIII.
                       THE FINAL CATASTROPHE.


While the following pages will contain necessarily brief notices of
the life of the party during an entire winter, they must conclude
with the record of the great calamity which befell the band of
heroes. Shortly after they found themselves settled for a campaign
of idleness, as they expected it to be, Lockwood was again confined
to his sleeping-bag on account of an injury to his feet which had
not been properly protected; his discomforts being aggravated by the
reflection that both provisions and fuel were beginning to reach a
low-tide level. The constant hunger which was experienced by all
hands went far to make their circumstances dismal and depressing;
while the only entertainment that could be provided was the reading
aloud, by one of the men, of a story and some newspaper scraps which
Rice had picked up at Cape Sabine. A little excitement was afforded
by a lottery for the distribution of some clothing and two
mattresses which had been brought ashore from the Proteus, one of
the latter falling to the lot of Lockwood. And now came a
proposition for a sledge expedition, not to discover islands,
glaciers, fiords, and prominent capes, but to go after the abandoned
whale-boat which had floated down with the floe. This must be broken
up and used for fuel. Then followed another expedition, occupying
not less than eight days, to Cape Isabella, to obtain one hundred
pounds of preserved meat left there by the English. Feeling the want
of exercise, Lockwood occasionally took a long walk, and on one
occasion was so hungry when he returned, that he could not wait for
the regular evening meal, but fastened upon a lot of moldy potatoes
which had been abandoned, and with these filled his stomach, almost
expecting that the feast would cause his death. Some of the men went
still further, for, when a blue or a white fox was killed, even the
entrails of the animal were devoured. Food was the constant subject
of conversation with all of the party—what they would be able to
get, what they had enjoyed in former years at their distant homes,
and what they expected to enjoy after their return from the North.
Not only were their supplies getting lower day by day, but the only
warm thing they could now afford was a cup of tea, excepting on
Sunday, when they had a little rum with a bit of lemon.

On the 25th of November, the sun disappeared from view, not to be
seen again until the following February, and now the gloom of the
time and place was greatly increased. On that day Lockwood recorded
in his journal the following: “I have intended writing a letter home
recounting my experiences since leaving Fort Conger, but so far the
discomforts of this life have prevented me. It is difficult to get
the blubber-lamp for more than a few minutes during the day, and
sometimes it can not be had at all. The lamp is blown out every
evening when we are ready to retire, which is generally about eight
o’clock.”

Nor were their troubles in any way alleviated by the discovery that
one of the men had been seen, or was suspected of, visiting the
store-room to fill himself with food—especially despicable thieving.
The expedition to Cape Isabella resulted in finding the food which,
however, was abandoned in returning, as one of the men, Ellison,
became very sick, and had his hands, feet, and nose frozen. He was
brought home by a relief party in a helpless condition, Lockwood and
the other men of the party having completely worn themselves out by
exposure to the cold and hard work. As it was feared that the men
would become insane if they did not stop talking about food,
Lieutenant Greely began to deliver some lectures on the geography of
the United States and their natural productions; and this was
followed by miscellaneous discussions in regard to places for
business. Whistler, for example, praised the city of Independence,
in Kansas, as a splendid place; Long said he was going to set up a
restaurant at Ann Arbor in Michigan; Fredericks would follow suit at
Minneapolis in Minnesota; while Jewell counted upon a grocery-store
in Kansas.

After commenting upon the terrible weather, Lockwood gave expression
to the following: “These short rations make me feel the cold
dreadfully. It is a constant effort to keep one’s hands and feet
comfortable, or even comparatively so. I find my spirits first up
and then down. Sometimes, when I think of the months before us of
this life of misery and suffering, I do not see how we can possibly
pull through. At other times I feel much more hopeful; but this is a
life of inexpressible misery.”

For several days before the arrival of Thanksgiving-day, a great
feast was anticipated and on that day enjoyed, including a favorite
dish called by them “_son-of-a-gun_,” composed of bread, raisins,
milk, and a little blubber; nor did the exiles omit the reading of a
few chapters from the Bible. In the evening Lockwood entertained the
party with his experiences as a farmer at Annapolis, all being
interested, and he wound up by inviting the whole of the company to
assemble there and enjoy a dinner with him on the next
Thanksgiving-day, the said dinner to be composed in part of a roast
turkey stuffed with oysters and eaten with cranberries. In return
for this compliment, each one of the audience invited Lockwood to
partake with him of a feast after their return home, and expatiated
with great gusto on the dishes that he proposed to have served. The
promise made by Lynn was a roasted turkey; Ralston, hot hoe-cake;
Ellis, spare-rib; Long, pork-chops; Biederbick, old regiment dish
called buffers; Connell, Irish stew; Bender, a roasted pig; Snyder,
tenderloin-steak; Brainard, peaches and cream; Fredericks, black
cake and preserves; Saler, veal cutlets; Whistler, flapjacks and
molasses; Jewell, roasted oysters on toast; Rice, clam-chowder;
Israel, hashed liver; Gardiner, Virginia pone; Ellison, Vienna
sausage; Pavy, _pâté-de-fois-gras_; Henry, Hamburg steak;
Kislingbury, hashed turkey, chicken, and veal; Greely, Parker House
rolls, coffee, cheese, omelette, rice, and chicken curry. It was
after this jolly discussion of imaginary good things that the party
sat down to a stew of seal-blubber and nothing more. The next day
Lockwood partook of his first dish of seal-skin which he found as
hard to digest as it was difficult to swallow.

On one occasion, when nearly all were asleep, a scratching noise was
heard upon the roof, and it was ascertained that a blue fox was
trying to make an entrance. The same night the ears of the sleepers
were saluted by a loud roar, caused by the ice moving down the
straits, a sound most terrible to human nerves. At one time, after
Lockwood had expressed his gratitude for enjoying warm feet for a
whole night, he resumed the subject of food, and then penned the
following: “My mind dwells constantly on the dishes of my childhood
at home. O my dear home, and the dear ones there! Can it be possible
I shall some day see them again, and that these days of misery will
pass away? My dear father, is he still alive? My dear mother and
sisters, Harry, and my nieces and brothers-in-law, how often do I
think of them! Only three days more to the top of the hill!”
(alluding to the longest night, or winter solstice).

“As to my bread, I always eat it regretfully. If I eat it before
tea, I regret that I did not keep it; and if I wait until tea comes
and then eat it, I drink my tea rather hastily and do not get the
satisfaction out of the cold meat and bread I otherwise would. What
a miserable life, where a few crumbs of bread weigh so heavily on
one’s mind! It seems to be so with all the rest. All sorts of
expedients are tried to cheat one’s stomach, but with about the same
result. By way of securing the idea of a warm piece of meat, I
sometimes pour upon it a bit of my hot tea, but the effort proves
futile.”

On the 21st of December, the day which Lockwood had long been
anticipating with pleasure, he expressed his gratification in these
words: “The top of the hill! the most glorious day of this dreary
journey through the valley of cold and hunger has at last come, and
is now nearly gone. Thank God, the glorious sun commences to return,
and every day gets lighter and brings him nearer! It is an augury
that we shall yet pull through all right.” In view of his ultimate
fate, how unutterably touching are these hopeful words!

Before the close of that day, however, he made another record in his
journal, which forcibly illustrates their deplorable condition, as
follows:

“Had a good fox-stew this evening. By a great effort I was able to
save one ounce of my bread and about two ounces of butter, for
Christmas. I shall make a vigorous effort to abstain from eating it
before then. Put it in charge of Biederbick as an additional
safeguard.”

Among the entertainments enjoyed by the party were lectures by
Lieutenant Greely on the several States of the Union. After one of
them, on Louisiana, had been delivered, Lockwood added to it an
account of his trip from Baltimore to Texas, and that from New
Orleans to Cincinnati, all of which narrative was well received.

For several days before Christmas, all were eagerly looking forward
to the grand forthcoming dinner and talking about it, a number of
them, like Lockwood, saving up a part of their scanty daily
allowance for the occasion. Lockwood mentioned that when he proposed
to exchange the promise of a fine Christmas-dinner on their return
home for a piece of dog-biscuit delivered at once, he found no one
ready to accept his _liberal_ offer. The Christmas-dinner was
similar to that on Thanksgiving-day; various songs were sung, and,
at the close of the feast, hearty cheers were given for Lieutenant
Greely, Corporal Ellison, Rice the photographer, and the two cooks.

On Christmas-night all the party enjoyed a refreshing sleep, and the
next day there was much talk about the distant homes and friends.
Lockwood was greatly pleased to learn that his comrades had formed a
high opinion of his father from what Greely and he had occasionally
told them; and, while describing the family reunions in Washington,
he was affected to tears for the first time during his Northern
campaign, excepting when Rice had come from Esquimaux Point with the
Garlington records, when his tears were the result of gratitude.

In a region where eating had become pre-eminently the chief end of
man, it is not strange that the business of marketing should have
become popular. How it was managed may be gathered from the
following paragraph: “To-day has been a market-day, everybody
trading rations—bread for butter, meat for bread, bread for soup,
etc. A great deal of talking done, but not many solid trades made. I
traded about half of my to-morrow’s _son-of-a-gun_ for about eight
ounces of bread; then I gave Brainard one ounce and a half of butter
for two dog-biscuits, but my trading did not prove profitable.”

As for New-Year’s-day, it came and departed without any special
demonstrations: the _son-of-a-gun_ was enjoyed by all parties; many
of the ice-bound hearts were warmed by memories of home; and Greely
and Lockwood had a long talk about the condition of affairs, and the
prospects for the future.

The business of trading among the explorers being discouraged, did
not long continue, but was succeeded by some other importations from
civilization, viz., the taking of property of other people without
leave or license. A report was made to Lieutenant Greely that some
one had taken a quarter of a pound of bacon, left in the stearine by
the cook; also that a barrel of bread had been broken open and two
pounds taken away. This proved that the bears and the foxes were not
the only thieves to be found in the Arctic regions. The man
suspected of the deed was closely watched and had a narrow escape
from being properly punished.

On the 10th of January, the case of poor Corporal Ellison was again
brought up for discussion and prompt action. It had been hoped that
his frosted feet would be restored to their normal condition, but
this was not to be, for they were both amputated by Nature, and two
of his fingers besides. Strange to say, this was accomplished
without his being aware of what was taking place, so little vitality
remained in these parts. When we recall the sufferings of this man,
in connection with his surroundings and his distance from the
comforts of home, we must conclude that the stories of fiction can
not eclipse the wonders of actual life and experience. What a
combination there of cold and hunger, bodily pain and mental
anguish, darkness and perpetual storms!

As we pass over the daily records made by Lockwood in his journal at
this particular time, we find food and the dangers of starvation to
be the absorbing themes. It seems strange that, in a land of ice and
snow, there should have been any apprehensions about a sufficient
supply of drinking-water; but this was the case, and the fact came
home to the exiles when they found that their supply of tea had to
be reduced to half a cup per man. Good water was not only scarce,
but could not be obtained from the neighboring lake, their sole
dependence, without great toil in chopping away the ice. They had
the ice, of course, but there was not sufficient fuel to reduce it
to a liquid.

As they could keep warm only by remaining in their sleeping-bags,
the manner of visiting each other was simply to exchange
sleeping-bags; and thus, when Lockwood wanted to have a talk with
Greely, one of the companions of the latter would exchange bags with
the visitor.

On the 18th of January, another cloud was thrown upon the party by
the death of Cross. He died of a kind of heart-disease, induced, it
was supposed, by intemperance in drinking. For several hours before
his death he uttered low moans which seemed a kind of echo from the
grinding of the far-off ice-fields. His remains were enveloped in
coffee-sacks and an American flag, and deposited in a stony grave
near the neighboring lake, the only funeral remarks having been made
by Lieutenant Lockwood.

On the 21st, Lockwood had a talk with Greely about his own health;
said he was very weak, and had been so for two weeks, but had not
mentioned it for fear of depressing the men; he could not account
for it, and concluded by saying that if he should not be well or
better when the time came to make the contemplated passage of the
straits, he desired to be left behind with his share of the rations,
and then be sent for from Littleton Island. To this Greely replied
that he would never harbor such an idea for a single moment; that he
would never abandon a living soul.

On the 2d of February, Rice and Jans started to test the passage of
the straits, hoping to reach Littleton Island, where they expected
to find some provisions or a relief-ship. But, alas! they were
stopped by open water, and not successful, though they traveled
about fifty miles up and down the floes, and were absent four days.
Owing to the bad weather, they did not even get a glimpse of the
coast of Greenland. All were greatly disappointed, and some felt
that death from starvation was staring them in the face; and yet
they found some relief in the increased light preceding the
reappearance of the sun. Lockwood, who now became despondent and
apathetic, endeavored to peer into the future, and wondered whether
his bones were really to be left in the Arctic regions. He mourned
over the fact that he had not been as good a son and as kind a
brother as he might have been, and hoped that the dear ones at home
would remember him as he wished to be, and not as he had been. As to
the end, he hoped it would come soon, whatever it might be; and he
declared himself possessed by a feeling of indifference to hunger,
cold, and gloom, “all of them enemies of existence.” After mourning
over the approaching fate of Ellison, he recorded these touching
words: “How often I think of the dear ones at home, the Sunday
evening reunions, and all the bright and happy pictures that present
themselves! My dear, good old father! may he look with charity on my
many short-comings! My dear mother and sisters and Harry,
brothers-in-law, and nieces! I trust that they are well and happy,
and, if I do not pull through this, will learn to look on my memory
kindly!” An allusion that he now made to his companions in suffering
was to this effect: “The party presents a bold front, and is not
wanting in spirit. If our fate is the worst, I do not think we shall
disgrace the name of Americans and of soldiers.” The attempt of Rice
to cross the straits to Littleton Island was heroic in the extreme,
and his pluck was further exemplified by a proposition that he
submitted to Greely to make a second effort to cross the straits,
and that, too, unattended by any companion; but the idea was not
sanctioned.

On the 22d of February, strange to say, a raven made its appearance
in the vicinity of the Arctic camp, but was not killed, although it
might have been enjoyed at the forthcoming dinner. It must have been
a great relief to some of the party that it disappeared without
uttering its dreadful cry, “_Nevermore!_” as translated by the poet,
Poe.

On the 27th, not knowing what might happen to him, Lockwood wrote
the following in his journal: “The chronometer in my pocket is the
one used on the trip to 83° 24´ and on all my trips in this region.
My intention is to buy it, but, in case I do not get back, I would
have it purchased and kept in the family.”

When the sun first made its appearance above the horizon, as it
carried his mind away to his far-distant home, he gave expression to
this emotion: “O God! how many years of my life would I give to be
there!”

Every day, observations were made from neighboring elevations to
ascertain the condition of the straits separating them from the
Greenland coast which was distinctly visible in clear weather,
hoping without hope to see it frozen over from shore to shore; but
the lateness of the season precluded all reasonable expectation of
such a result, and the daily reports of open water were depressing
in the extreme. On the 13th of March, the announcement was made that
the supplies of coffee, chocolate, and canned vegetables were all
exhausted, and that henceforth they would have to depend almost
entirely on pemmican, bacon, bread, and tea, all of which, though
given in one-third rations only, would not last for more than a
month, thus leaving them without supplies to cross the straits in
the event of a satisfactory freeze. In view of all these
circumstances, it is impossible to imagine how they could quietly
continue their preparations for a journey to the supposed goal at
Littleton Island. Surely the hope which inspired the sufferers was
eternal and supreme in its strength and pathos. “The straits,” said
Lockwood, “are open, and I see no prospect of their freezing so that
we can get across. Of course, I hope to the contrary; for this means
death, if we can find no game here.” On a subsequent day he writes
as follows: “We look to the end with equanimity, and the spirits of
the party, in spite of the prospect of a miserable death, are
certainly wonderful. I am glad as each day comes to an end. It
brings us nearer the end of this life, whatever that end is to be.”

On the 23d of March, the last of the regular fuel was exhausted, and
the food was so nearly gone that the men actually began to collect
their seal-skin clothing and foot-gear for any emergency that might
happen. Game was not only scarce, but the men were getting almost
too weak to endure a hunt. To avoid long tramps, which were sure to
be unsuccessful, they turned their attention to shrimp-fishing, but,
as one man could only get three pounds in one day, the prospect in
this direction was not hopeful.

During the month of March and the early part of April, there was
nothing done by the able-bodied members of the party but to try to
secure some game, the only incidents occurring to interrupt the
monotony being the deaths of the Esquimaux Frederick Christiansen,
and Sergeant Lynn. The former had been complaining for a week or
more, but nobody thought him in danger, and he died unexpectedly.
Lockwood’s tribute to him was to this effect: “He was a good man,
and I felt a great affection for him. He constantly worked hard in
my service, and never spared himself on our sledge-trips. His death
makes me feel very sorrowful.” He was buried by the side of Cross,
near the lake. The death of Lynn was also unexpected. He fully
appreciated his condition, and gave some directions regarding his
last wishes. He was much liked, and highly spoken of by all. After
the burial service had been read at the house by Lieutenant Greely,
his remains were also placed by the lake-side with those of Cross
and the Esquimaux.

The drama was about to close, the curtain already falling upon the
band of heroes:

  “And their hearts, though stout and brave,
  Still, like muffled drums were beating
  Funeral marches to the grave.”

The phantom of Starvation, which had long been following them over
the ice and snow, and dallying with their hopes and fears as they
lay in their comfortless camps, had now become a terrible reality,
determined to assert all his powers. Three of his victims were
already under the snow, and were soon followed by several others,
including the one who had directed them in many of their duties and
befriended them in trouble, and whose honored name, attached to a
noted island and a famed headland in the Arctic world, will be
forever remembered with pride and affection by his countrymen.

The concluding paragraph in Lieutenant Lockwood’s journal was
written on the 7th of April, 1884, and alludes to the sickness and
death of his two comrades. In the last allusion that he makes to
himself, he speaks of his excessive weakness, and of the fact that
he could not rise from his sleeping-bag without great difficulty.
His death occurred two days afterward.

Having been permitted to examine an elaborate and interesting
journal kept by Sergeant Brainard, a few notices relating to the
closing days and the death of Lieutenant Lockwood are reproduced, as
follows:

_January 12, 1884._—Lieutenant Lockwood is very weak. He has been
saving the greater portion of his bread and meat for several days,
and talks to himself about food. He frequently looks intently at the
lamp, and requests that it be kept burning all night.

_January 20th._—Lieutenant Lockwood is growing weaker and weaker. He
said to me a few days ago, “Brainard, I have lost my grip,” meaning
that he had lost his last hope of life.

_January 24th._—Lieutenant Lockwood seems to be in better spirits
to-day.

_January 28th._—The doctor said to-day that if Lieutenant Lockwood
did not brace up, he would never recover.

_January 30th._—Lieutenant Lockwood is growing steadily weaker, and
talks but seldom now. I wish he would try to be more cheerful.

_February 15th._—Lieutenant Lockwood is better, but does not improve
so rapidly as I would wish.

_April 4th._—The rations of Lieutenant Lockwood and Linn have been
increased to one fourth of a dovekie each per day.

_April 5th._—I am afraid that Lieutenant Lockwood and Linn will soon
follow the faithful Esquimaux, who has just died. They can not, or
they will not, eat shrimps any more. Although they are both given an
extra allowance of dovekie, it is not sufficient to restore them.

_April 7th._—Lieutenant Lockwood and Jewell will soon follow Linn.
They are very weak and failing rapidly.

_April 8th_.—Lieutenant Lockwood fell in a faint in the alley-way,
and much difficulty was experienced in resuscitating him.

_April 9th._—Lieutenant Lockwood became unconscious at an early hour
this morning, and at 4.20 P. M. he breathed his last. His end was
painless and without a struggle. This will be a sad and unexpected
blow to his family, who evidently idolized him. To me it is also a
sorrowful event. He had been my companion during long and eventful
excursions, and my feelings toward him were akin to those of a
brother. Biederbick, who was with him at the last moment, and I
straightened his limbs and prepared his remains for burial. It is
the saddest duty I have ever been called on to perform, and I hope I
may never experience the like again. A few days prior to his death
he had spoken of writing to his family, but, owing to weakness, had
deferred the matter until too late.

_April 10th._—The last sad rites were performed over the remains of
our late comrade, and he was interred with the others on Cemetery
Ridge, Lieutenant Greely reading the Episcopal service.

To the above may be added the following remark made by Brainard in
regard to his friend Lockwood: “The lieutenant was buried in an
officer’s blouse. It affected me deeply to pass his grave, as I
thought of the leader of our little party which had carried the
Stars and Stripes beyond the English Jack; but this feeling soon
wore away, and, as I had so many other horrible things to occupy my
mind, I became somewhat indifferent.”

But wholly indifferent he could not be, even when he saw two men in
one sleeping-bag, one of them a corpse, and the other too weak to
assist in pulling the body out for burial.

Another and most touching reference made by Brainard to the
burial-place of his friend Lockwood occurs in his journal under date
of May 31, 1884, and is as follows: “In my daily journeys across
Cemetery Ridge, it was but natural at first that my reflections
should be sad and gloomy. Here lie my departed comrades, and to
their left is the vacant space where, in a few days, my own remains
will be deposited if sufficient strength remain to those who may
survive me. The brass buttons on Lieutenant Lockwood’s blouse, worn
bright by the flying gravel, protruded through the scanty covering
of earth which our depleted strength barely enabled us to place over
him. At first these dazzling buttons would awaken thoughts of those
bright days spent at Fort Conger, of the half-forgotten scene of his
death, and of the universal sorrow that was felt at his departure.
But later my own wretched circumstances served to counteract these
feelings, and I would pass and repass this place without emotion,
and almost with indifference.”

The supply of food had been almost entirely exhausted during the
first few days of April, and it was impossible to obtain any game or
rations from distant caches. An effort made by Rice to secure
certain provisions that had been abandoned on a former expedition in
order to save the life of Ellison when frozen, resulted in his own
death, breathing his last in the arms of Fredericks, his only
companion, who buried him in a lonely, ice-made grave. Nor were the
horrors of the situation lessened by the discovery that the man
Henry had been guilty of stealing their food, for which, after ample
warning, under orders from Lieutenant Greely, he was summarily shot,
according to the law of self-preservation. His remains were not
deposited in the cemetery, but by themselves in a place near by.

The total number of deaths out of the twenty-five composing the
complete party of explorers was nineteen, and, while twelve of them
were buried at Camp Clay, the remainder, like the lamented Rice,
were buried elsewhere or where they died. Jans was lost in his
kyack. During a discussion that occurred, about the final
disposition of the dead, Lieutenant Greely expressed the wish that
the remains of his men might be left undisturbed. They had died, he
said, beneath Arctic skies. Arctic desolation witnessed their
sufferings, heard their cries of anguish. They are buried in Arctic
soil. Let them lie where they fell. Lockwood told me that he wanted
to rest forever on the field of his work. Why disturb them? Why not
respect their wishes?

Before closing this chapter it seems proper that an allusion should
be made to alleged cannibalism at Camp Clay. The writer of this was
informed by Sergeant Brainard that such might have been the case,
but that not a single one of the survivors had ever known or
witnessed anything of the kind. So far as Lieutenant Lockwood was
concerned, it was positively established, by unimpeachable
testimony, that his remains were not mutilated in the least degree.
When carefully carried, with all the others, on board the ship that
was to bring them to the United States, his remains were perfect in
every respect, and of this his father has the assurance of those who
saw them.

In view of the fact that Sergeant David L. Brainard accompanied
Lieutenant Lockwood in all his explorations, it seems only proper
that a notice of his life should appear in this volume. He was born
in Norway, Herkimer County, New York, December 21, 1856, his parents
having come from Massachusetts. His father was of French extraction
and his mother of English stock. He attended a district school until
his eleventh year, when he removed with his family to Freetown,
Cortland County, New York, where he attended the State Normal
School. On the 18th of September, 1876, he enlisted at New York city
in the regular army, being assigned to Company L, Second Cavalry,
then stationed at Fort Ellis, in Montana Territory. He joined his
troops late that year after an arduous journey of five hundred miles
on horseback from Corinne, Utah. In the following spring he
participated in the Indian campaigns under General Miles, along the
Yellowstone River and its tributaries, and was wounded in the face
while in action with the Sioux, at Muddy Creek, Montana, May 7,
1877. In August of the same year, he was selected as one of four men
to act as escort to General Sherman and party in their tour through
the National Park. In October following, he was made a corporal, and
in July, 1879, was promoted to be a sergeant. He was frequently in
charge of parties in the field on detached service, and was
intrusted with important missions by his commanding officers.
Lieutenant Doane, Second Cavalry, recommended him for detail on the
Howgate Polar Expedition in May, 1880, Brainard visiting Washington
for that purpose. The enterprise having been abandoned, he was
ordered back to his regiment at Fort Assiniboin, on Milk River.
Early in the spring of 1881, Lieutenant Greely requested his detail
on the Lady Franklin Bay Expedition, and, on his arrival in
Washington, appointed him first sergeant of the expedition, which
position he held during the three years of Arctic service. On the
1st of August, 1884, he was transferred, with the rank of sergeant,
to the United States Signal Corps, having always acquitted himself
with ability and honor as a man, a soldier, and an explorer.




                                XIX.
                         THE WOEFUL RETURN.


Without stopping to discuss the action of Congress or the Government
officials in regard to sending relief to the Greely Expedition, the
writer desires to mention that the names of Senator Joseph R. Hawley
and Representative E. John Ellis, because of their manly action in
Congress in behalf of the suffering explorers, are far more
deserving of places on the charts of the North than those of many
others which have thus been honored. In 1882 a vessel called the
Neptune, Captain William Sopp, was chartered at St. John’s,
Newfoundland, and with a full supply of provisions was dispatched
for Lady Franklin Bay, but failing in her mission returned to
Newfoundland _without leaving_ any of her supplies in the North, but
bringing them all back to St. John’s! In 1883 the steamer Proteus,
Captain Richard Pike, was rechartered at St. John’s, and with a full
supply of provisions sailed for Discovery Harbor, but was crushed in
the ice near Cape Sabine, her crew succeeding in landing in a safe
place a small part of her cargo, some of which was subsequently
utilized by the Greely party.

In 1884 a third rescuing expedition was organized and dispatched for
the relief of the Greely exploring party. That expedition was
composed of a squadron of three ships, the Thetis, the Bear, and the
Alert, under the command of Commander Winfield S. Schley, of the
United States Navy. They left St. John’s on the 12th of May, and,
after the usual tribulations along the western coast of Greenland,
reached the vicinity of Cape Sabine, and discovered the Greely party
at Camp Clay, on Sunday, the 22d of June, seventy-three days after
the death of Lieutenant Lockwood. The discovery was then made that,
out of the twenty-five men connected with the Greely Expedition only
seven were alive, viz., Lieutenant Greely, Brainard, Biederbick,
Fredericks, Long, Connell, and Ellison. As soon as the survivors
could be relieved and transferred to the ships, the remains of the
dead were exhumed with care and taken to the ships for
transportation to the United States, excepting the remains of
Esquimaux Frederick, which were left at Disco.

As the pictures presented by the survivors lying in their camp,
dazed with suffering and surprise and a joy they could not manifest,
and the incidents they subsequently narrated of intense suffering,
can only prove heart-rending to the reader, they will not now be
dwelt upon. The departure of the ships, with their strange list of
dead and living passengers, seemed to enhance the gloom which filled
the sky and rested upon the sea. Their condition was so deplorable,
that a delay of a very few days would have left none to tell the
tale of woe and suffering. At least two could not have lived
twenty-four hours. That this time was gained, under the stimulus of
the twenty-five thousand dollars reward, appears from an article
written by an officer of the Relief Expedition and published in the
“Century” of May, 1885, as follows:

“The reward of twenty-five thousand dollars that Congress had
offered for the first information of Greely had incited the whalers
to take risks that they otherwise would have shunned. They had
expressed a determination to strive for it, and were ever on the
alert for a chance to creep northward. The Relief Squadron was
determined, on its part, that the whalers should not secure the
first information, and were equally zealous in pushing northward. It
was this rivalry (a friendly one, for our relations with the
whaling-captains were of the pleasantest nature) that hurried us
across Melville Bay and brought us together within sight of Cape
York. It had been thought possible that Greely or an advance party
might be there.”

Mr. Ellis proposed in the last session of Congress that, as the
reward had not been spent, yet had contributed to the rescue, it
should be appropriated to building, at Washington, a monument to the
dead.

The temporary halt at Disco Harbor was saddened by the death of
Ellison, after prolonged sufferings, as if his noble spirit was
determined to join its departed comrades in their passage to the
skies from that Northern Land of Desolation.

In the official record of the Relief Expedition, Commander Schley
makes an allusion to the important part taken by Lieutenant Lockwood
in the Greely Expedition which should be repeated in this place.
After submitting certain papers which had been found in a cairn at
Breevort Island, he says: “It was a wonderful story. It told how the
expedition, during its two years at Lady Franklin Bay, had marked
out the interior of Grinnell Land, and how Lockwood had followed the
northern shore of Greenland, and had reclaimed for America the honor
of ‘the farthest north.’”

On Thursday, the 17th of July, the Relief Expedition arrived at St.
John’s, Newfoundland, where they were kindly welcomed, and the
tidings of their arrival promptly telegraphed to the anxious
multitudes in the United States. Complete arrangements were made for
the continuous voyage of the living and the dead to their several
homes.

In a dispatch which the Secretary of the Navy sent to Commander
Schley, on the day of his return, he said, “Preserve tenderly the
remains of the heroic dead,” and that order was duly obeyed. They
were placed in metallic caskets, and the squadron sailed from St.
John’s on the 26th of July, arriving at Portsmouth, New Hampshire,
on the 2d of August. As the first duty after a battle is to bury the
dead, it is to be regretted that this was not done before the
display was made at Portsmouth. It was not thus that England
received her victorious fleet from Trafalgar, bearing home the
remains of the dead hero Nelson. The mutilated remains of the dead
should first have been delivered over to the bleeding hearts that
awaited them. While so many unurned corpses remained in the ships,
the celebration was but a ghastly jubilee. Requiems should have been
chanted before pæans were sung. The only casket removed from the
ships at Portsmouth was that containing the remains of Sergeant
Jewell, who was a native of New Hampshire. The squadron now sailed
for New York, and on its arrival, the 8th of August, was received
with great enthusiasm. Here the remains of the dead were delivered
to the custody of the army commander at Governor’s Island, by whom
the final dispositions were made. The remains of Lieutenant Lockwood
were forwarded to Annapolis and placed under a military guard, in
the church of St. Anne, where the young hero had been baptized,
confirmed, and received his first communion. The funeral was of a
military character, and the attendance was very large, comprehending
all the naval, military, and civil organizations of the city.
Recalling the words of the poet Whittier, many of the mourners
present must have felt their special force, when he says:

  “I know not what the future hath
    Of marvel or surprise,
  Assured alone that life and death
    _His_ mercy underlies.”

The remains of the hero lie in the beautiful cemetery of the Naval
Academy, overlooking the place of his birth and the scenes of his
childhood. An appropriate tomb was erected over them, bearing this
inscription:

                       JAMES BOOTH LOCKWOOD,
                   LIEUTENANT UNITED STATES ARMY,
                    Born at Annapolis, Maryland,
                          October 9, 1852,
                        Died at Cape Sabine,
                           April 9, 1884.

“The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be revealed in us.”

On the day that the rector of St. Anne’s church, Rev. William S.
Southgate, gave notice of the time of the burial, he made the
following remarks:

“One of the truths of the Bible, taught us by the Church, the most
difficult to receive and to hold practically, is that expressed in
the words of the Collect for the last week: ‘O God, whose
never-failing providence ordereth all things both in heaven and on
earth.’

“The difficulty arises from the fact that in so many cases we can
not discover either the justice or the mercy or even the expediency
of that ordering.

“And yet at times we get a glimpse of light that reveals much of the
fitness and beauty of this divine ordering of events. Here is an
example before us. There is a peculiar appropriateness in the
ordering of events that brings James Booth Lockwood here to be
buried. Born in this parish, baptized here, confirmed in St. Anne by
Bishop Whittingham, April 19, 1868, he received his first communion
at this altar on Christmas-day of the same year. The rector of the
parish, who presented him for confirmation and administered to him
the holy communion, has just been called suddenly to his rest. In
the midst of untiring labors the call found them both at the post of
duty, and both were taken away while in the performance of that
duty. But there was something peculiarly sad in the circumstances
and mode of young Lockwood’s death—circumstances due partly to the
nature of the work in which he was engaged, partly to the fault of
others. But what matters it how or when he died, if found at Death’s
call doing the duty assigned to him?

“One of the earliest of the adventurers along this coast, then as
little known to the world as the Arctic regions are now to us, when
his little ship was overwhelmed by the stormy sea, comforted the
frightened and trembling helmsman with the assuring words, ‘My
child, heaven is as near to us by sea as by land.’ And so what
matters it where we die and how we die, so long as we are reconciled
to God, and are faithfully fulfilling our calling? May God give us
grace so to live that we may never be afraid to die in any place or
in any manner!”

That the story and the fate of James B. Lockwood excited a profound
sentiment of sorrow and admiration throughout the entire country was
manifested in many ways, and a notice of some of them will form an
appropriate conclusion to this _in-memoriam_ volume. Among the first
tributes of honor and affection was the following official order
published by the colonel of his regiment, announcing his death to
the military associates of the young soldier:

                            [Order, No. 46.]
                                 Headquarters Twenty-third Infantry,
                                 Fort Wayne, Mich., _July 25, 1884_.

  Another name is added to the list of our honored dead. The
  official announcement is received from the War Department of the
  death of First-Lieutenant James B. Lockwood, at Camp Clay, near
  Cape Sabine, Smith’s Sound, Arctic regions, April 9, 1884. He was
  assigned to this regiment as second lieutenant, October 1, 1873,
  and promoted first lieutenant March 15, 1883. He served with
  distinction throughout Arizona, Nebraska, Kansas, the Indian
  Territory, and Colorado, always performing with zeal and
  thoroughness the various and complex duties that usually fall to
  the lot of the young officer. In 1881 he turned from the arduous
  duties and savage warfare of frontier life to face still greater
  hardship and danger, and finally to lay down his life in those
  frozen and inhospitable regions which have proved the sepulchre of
  so many heroes before him.

  Lieutenant Lockwood was a young officer of great promise in his
  profession; of a noble and exalted character, his fine mind tended
  constantly to the investigation of scientific truths. When the
  privations, the suffering, and the achievements of the “Lady
  Franklin Bay Expedition” are fully related, higher authority will
  doubtless pay a more fitting tribute to the worth, the fortitude,
  and the matchless courage of an officer who, in Arctic
  exploration, has carried the American flag to a point in advance
  of that of any other nation.

  His reward is an imperishable fame, which he sought with even
  greater resolution than leads the soldier to the cannon’s mouth.
  The pleasant smile and manly form of our comrade are lost to us
  forever, but his name and memory will be always green in our
  hearts.

  Officers of the regiment will wear the usual badge of mourning for
  thirty days.

  By order of Colonel Black:
                          T. G. M. Smith,
       _First Lieutenant and Adjutant Twenty-third Infantry._


When the news of Lockwood’s fate was known at Fort Leavenworth,
Kansas, arrangements were at once made, by those who had known and
loved him there, to erect a tablet to his memory in the handsome
post chapel at that place. When completed it was placed in a
conspicuous position, and bore the following inscription:

                            In Memoriam
                         JAMES B. LOCKWOOD,
              FIRST LIEUTENANT TWENTY-THIRD INFANTRY,
                          A MEMBER OF THE
                      Greely Polar Expedition,
                Died at Cape Sabine, Grinnell Land,
                           April 9, 1884.


This tablet was erected chiefly at the expense of Lockwood’s old
regiment. To one of the officers General Lockwood presented a sword
that had belonged to his son, and, in his acknowledgment, that
officer made this remark: “As a friend of your son, I shall take
pride and comfort from having in my possession the sword of a
friend, who lived so nobly and died so honorably. Should you desire
it to come back to your family when I have joined your son, I hope
you will tell me so, and I will provide accordingly.” Among those
who earnestly co-operated with this gentleman in erecting the tablet
was one who wrote to his fellow-officer as follows: “No two people,
outside of Lockwood’s own blood relations, loved him more than you
and I. And yet I do not know that I am right in calling his end
untimely. He died, as he had ever lived, in the discharge of his
duty, and I imagine, when the records of the expedition become more
known, it will be seen that his duty was well done to the end. He
was a man, and has died like one. God grant that when our time comes
it may find us, too, in the discharge of our duty!”

During Lieutenant Greely’s sojourn in Portsmouth, when on his way
home, and while yet too feeble to use the pen, he dictated the
following letter to General Lockwood:

                                Portsmouth, N. H., _August 9, 1884_.

  My dear General Lockwood: Had I not seen Commander Sigsbee, and
  given to him such information as he wished, and as I knew would be
  most important to you in regard to your son, I should have
  attempted an earlier letter to you. I am still unable to write to
  you by my own hand. As I told Commander Sigsbee, James died from
  water around the heart, induced by insufficient nutrition. His
  last days were quiet and painless. He did his whole duty as a
  soldier and an officer. His loyalty to truth, fidelity, and zeal
  could always be relied upon by me. His unvarying kindness, his
  gentleness, his deep interest in and toward the men of the
  expedition indicated a nature thoroughly imbued with the essential
  and fundamental principles of Christianity, and won for him their
  good-will, confidence, and affection. I feel that you and Mrs.
  Lockwood may well be proud of such a son. His daily conversation
  during the past winter told us how much he loved his parents, and
  how deep and close were the bonds of affection which united him to
  his sisters and brother. He seemed to feel that he had not done
  full justice to the many and great advantages that you had given
  him, and hoped to make amends in the future. His innate modesty in
  this, as in other matters, I think did scant justice to his true
  merits. I write by Mrs. Greely’s hand—she joins me in sympathy and
  condolence. I feel that this letter insufficiently informs you
  regarding James. From day to day he intended to write you, but
  delayed too long. His diary, in short-hand, was kept up, I
  believe, to the day preceding his death.
                          Sincerely yours,
                                                       A. W. Greely.

Another letter from Portsmouth, written by Sergeant D. L. Brainard
in answer to some inquiries made by General Lockwood, was as
follows:

                             Portsmouth, N. H., _September 4, 1884_.

  _General_ H. H. Lockwood.

  Dear Sir: Your letter of the 22d ult., requesting information of
  the missing effects of your dear son, which had been committed to
  my care, is just received. . . . The effects in question,
  excepting the ring and coins, I turned over to Major Greely before
  leaving this city in August. The two latter articles I afterward
  found and gave to Mrs. Peck, who, with her husband, called on me
  at the Parker House, in Boston. The setting of the ring, I am
  sorry to say, was not found after his death, although diligent
  search was made. He had spoken of it but a few days before his
  death, and expressed great concern for its safety. It was supposed
  to be suspended from his neck in a small parcel, but search
  revealed nothing. The compass was among the effects I transferred
  to Lieutenant Greely, as were also two pencils, his pipe, spoon,
  knife, etc. With reference to the inner life of your son, do not
  feel any concern. Although not an open professor of any particular
  creed, he followed closely the golden rule during my acquaintance
  with him. When I reach Washington I shall be glad to call on you.
  In the mean time I shall willingly answer any question with regard
  to his life in the frigid zone that you may desire to ask. Place
  no reliance on any of the adverse newspaper reports that are
  occasionally seen reflecting on his conduct; they are not worthy
  of a moment’s thought. Hoping that the articles have reached you
  in safety ere this, I am, very sincerely yours,

                                                     D. L. Brainard.

Another and a very handsome letter sent to General Lockwood by an
officer of the army, who had long known the son, was as follows:

                                “San Antonio, Fla., _July 25, 1884_.

  “My dear General: The newspapers tardily convey to me the news of
  your son’s heroic death. I can not express to you how much both my
  wife and myself were affected by this intelligence. I knew your
  son from his entry into the Twenty-third Infantry in 1873 until I
  was promoted to the Twenty-second in 1879, and formed so high an
  estimate of his sterling soldierly character that it is
  inexpressibly sad to think of his career being cut short at so
  early an age. But, though early, he has nevertheless left his mark
  on the scientific record of the country—a record which can never
  perish while the frozen North continues to hold the secrets he has
  more nearly penetrated than any other explorer of those regions.
  This must be, my dear general, some consolation to you, though I
  well know that it can not wholly atone for the loss of your noble
  son. But, as time passes, this reflection may soften your paternal
  grief.

  “A life-work need not extend to the allotted threescore years and
  ten. In the providence of God it often compasses a much smaller
  period of time; when it is accomplished, God calls the worker
  home.

  “Who shall measure the work your son accomplished in the examples
  he gave of fidelity to duty, of heroic fortitude? How many
  fainting souls in the future, reading of his devotion, will be
  strengthened to go forward in the paths marked out for them! That
  your grief may be in time assuaged by these reflections is the
  prayer devoutly offered by your sincere friend.”

Many private letters of condolence and sympathy were written to the
parents of the deceased, by personal friends and others, some of
which serve to illustrate the character of the departed. One of
these friends wrote as follows:

“The tender regard and sincere love I had for James prompts me to
write to you and express my heart-felt sorrow in losing him. We were
dear friends for years, and a more upright and honorable man never
lived, and our regiment has lost a member who can never be replaced,
and the memory of him who died far away from us can never be
forgotten.”

In another letter a friend wrote as follows:

“Dr. B——, U. S. A., one of James’s most intimate and best friends,
desires me to say that, of all the men he knew, James was to him far
dearer than any other. As for myself, I shall always hold James dear
to my heart, and hope some day, when all things pass away, to meet
him in that happy land where our loved ones are gone.”

In another letter occurs the following:

“Lockwood was among the best young officers of the regiment. Very
attentive to duty, and correct in habits, his promise of usefulness
was unusually great. I hope that the knowledge of duty well
performed, and under the most trying circumstances, may in some
degree ameliorate your great grief.”

Another friend writes:

“I but echo the feelings of all in the Twenty-third Infantry who
knew your son, in saying that your great loss is partly theirs. His
kindly and generous impulses, his sterling integrity, and his
thoroughness as an officer and a gentleman, secured and retained for
him the substantial good-will and friendship of all. And while we
may grieve at the mournful end of his career, yet this feeling is
somewhat neutralized in the melancholy satisfaction of knowing that
he died on the field of honor.”

In another letter from one who had been in the army and on the staff
of General Lockwood at Accomac, Va., occurs the following most
admirable and appropriate passage: “I do believe, dear general, that
all is well with your son. Standing where no human footstep had ever
trod before, seeing what no eye had ever before beheld, alone amid
the awful silence of that frozen deep—alone with God—there must have
been communings with the Holy One of more import to James than all
else besides. And at the last day you will again see your son in
glory, wearing the crown of those made perfect through suffering.”

Besides the many letters written by personal friends, there were
others from perfect strangers, who had either served under General
Lockwood in the army, or been especially interested in the fate of
the youthful hero.

Among the strangers who wrote letters of condolence was the Rev.
William E. Griffis, D. D., of Schenectady, N. Y., who had preached a
sermon on the conquests of peace, and in which he made the following
allusion to Lieutenant Lockwood: “The laurels that repose on the
memory of Lieutenant Lockwood are better than battle-honors or
wreaths after bloody victories.” It was his opinion that the Arctic
secret would yet be won; and that Lockwood and his brother heroes
were doing the will of God as explorers in the far North.

On the 20th of July, 1884, the Rev. Dr. John S. Lindsay, of St.
John’s Church, in Georgetown, delivered a sermon in which he alluded
to the return of the Greely Expedition, and especially to Lieutenant
Lockwood, who had been one of his parishioners. He said: “Just a few
days ago we were plunged into sorrow by the news that among the
living of the latest Arctic expedition who had been rescued was
_not_ our young townsman, the son of one of the most honored members
of this congregation; the dispatch that brought the glad
intelligence that six were saved was soon followed by the sad
announcement that he, vigorous as he was, had sunk under the rigors
of the climate, worn out by work and want. Has he left no lesson for
you and me, for all his fellow-men? Think of his ceaseless endeavor,
of the courage and devotion with which he bore the brunt of the
exploration, and wore away his own strength in seeking food for his
comrades and himself! See him, with a single companion, penetrating
nearer to the north pole than any other man had ever gone, however
daring! When he had done his whole duty, more than had ever been
done before, he lies down to rest—to die.

[Illustration: THE GREELY EXPEDITION.
MAP SHOWING THE EXPLORATIONS BY
LIEUT. J.B. LOCKWOOD, INFTY. A. S. O.
1882-1883]

“Most fittingly did his brother explorers give his name to this
spot, the farthest land north trod by human foot. Lockwood Island
shall stand, as long as the earth endures, amid the awful wastes and
silence of these mysterious regions, as the monument of this brave
young soldier. A child of the Church, the subject of ceaseless
prayer—of yours, of mine, of his family—we trust that his spirit,
chastened and exalted by the hardships he endured, winged its flight
from the inhospitable land that refused sustenance to his body, and
now rests and waits in the paradise of God. We mingle our tears with
his father’s and his mother’s, and with those of all who loved him;
but out of the deep we rejoice in the record he has left behind of
devotion to duty even unto death. Surely no life is short in which
so much is done, or in vain that gives such instruction and such
inspiration to other lives. In conclusion, let us not cast away our
faith in God, because of the mysteries and trials and sufferings of
life.”




                             Footnotes


[1]A suburb of Annapolis.


                              THE END.




                        Transcriber’s Notes


--Retained the copyright notice from the printed edition (although
  this book is in the public domain.)

--Silently corrected a few palpable typos.

--In the text versions only, delimited italicized text in
  _underscores_.

--In the table of distances travelled, abbreviated column headings
  to save space, and added a key to the abbreviations.

--Re-ordered the table of illustrations to match the order of
  illustrations in the text.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Farthest North, by Charles Lanman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FARTHEST NORTH ***

***** This file should be named 54019-0.txt or 54019-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/0/1/54019/

Produced by Marcia Brooks, Stephen Hutcheson, and the
online Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Letter 1
St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17--
TO Mrs. Saville, England
You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil forebodings.
I arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success of my undertaking.
I am already far north of London, and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which braces my nerves and fills me with delight.
Do you understand this feeling?
This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes.
Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid.
I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight.
There, Margaret, the sun is forever visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendour.
There--for with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators--there snow and frost are banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe.
Its productions and features may be without example, as the phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes.
What may not be expected in a country of eternal light?
I may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent forever.
I shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man.
These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river.
But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.
These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began my letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillize the mind as a steady purpose--a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye.
This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years.
I have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have been made in the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the pole.
You may remember that a history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our good Uncle Thomas' library.
My education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading.
These volumes were my study day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which I had felt, as a child, on learning that my father's dying injunction had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life.
These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven.
I also became a poet and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation; I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple where the names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated.
You are well acquainted with my failure and how heavily I bore the disappointment.
But just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.
Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking.
I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise.
I commenced by inuring my body to hardship.
I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage.
Twice I actually hired myself as an under-mate in a Greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration.
I must own I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness, so valuable did he consider my services.
And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?
My life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but I preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my path.
Oh, that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative!
My courage and my resolution is firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed.
I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude:  I am required not only to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.
This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia.
They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an English stagecoach.
The cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs--a dress which I have already adopted, for there is a great difference between walking the deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins.
I have no ambition to lose my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel.
I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think necessary among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing.
I do not intend to sail until the month of June; and when shall I return?
Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this question?
If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I may meet.
If I fail, you will see me again soon, or never.
Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret.
Heaven shower down blessings on you, and save me, that I may again and again testify my gratitude for all your love and kindness.
Your affectionate brother,   R. Walton
Letter 2
Archangel, 28th March, 17--
To Mrs. Saville, England
How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am by frost and snow!
Yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise.
I have hired a vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I have already engaged appear to be men on whom I can depend and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage.
But I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy, and the absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no friend, Margaret:  when I am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there will be none to participate my joy; if I am assailed by disappointment, no one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection.
I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling.
I desire the company of a man who could sympathize with me, whose eyes would reply to mine.
You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a friend.
I have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans.
How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother!
I am too ardent in execution and too impatient of difficulties.
But it is a still greater evil to me that I am self-educated:  for the first fourteen years of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas' books of voyages.
At that age I became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its most important benefits from such a conviction that I perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native country.
Now I am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen.
It is true that I have thought more and that my daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters call it) KEEPING; and I greatly need a friend who would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to endeavour to regulate my mind.
Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen.
Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms.
My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession.
He is an Englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of humanity.
I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel; finding that he was unemployed in this city, I easily engaged him to assist in my enterprise.
The master is a person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline.
This circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him.
A youth passed in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot overcome an intense distaste to the usual brutality exercised on board ship:  I have never believed it to be necessary, and when I heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindliness of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, I felt myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services.
I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the happiness of her life.
This, briefly, is his story.
Some years ago he loved a young Russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed a considerable sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the match.
He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor, and that her father would never consent to the union.
My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover, instantly abandoned his pursuit.
He had already bought a farm with his money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman's father to consent to her marriage with her lover.
But the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations.
"What a noble fellow!"
you will exclaim.
He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated:  he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which otherwise he would command.
Yet do not suppose, because I complain a little or because I can conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never know, that I am wavering in my resolutions.
Those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation.
The winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected.
I shall do nothing rashly:  you know me sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the safety of others is committed to my care.
I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my undertaking.
It is impossible to communicate to you a conception of the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which I am preparing to depart.
I am going to unexplored regions, to "the land of mist and snow," but I shall kill no albatross; therefore do not be alarmed for my safety or if I should come back to you as worn and woeful as the "Ancient Mariner."
You will smile at my allusion, but I will disclose a secret.
I have often attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that production of the most imaginative of modern poets.
There is something at work in my soul which I do not understand.
I am practically industrious--painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labour--but besides this there is a love for the marvellous, a belief in the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries me out of the common pathways of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to explore.
But to return to dearer considerations.
Shall I meet you again, after having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of Africa or America?
I dare not expect such success, yet I cannot bear to look on the reverse of the picture.
Continue for the present to write to me by every opportunity: I may receive your letters on some occasions when I need them most to support my spirits.
I love you very tenderly.
Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again.
Your affectionate brother,   Robert Walton
Letter 3
July 7th, 17--
To Mrs. Saville, England
My dear Sister,
I write a few lines in haste to say that I am safe--and well advanced on my voyage.
This letter will reach England by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from Archangel; more fortunate than I, who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many years.
I am, however, in good spirits:  my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them.
We have already reached a very high latitude; but it is the height of summer, and although not so warm as in England, the southern gales, which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so ardently desire to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which I had not expected.
No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter.
One or two stiff gales and the springing of a leak are accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and I shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage.
Adieu, my dear Margaret.
Be assured that for my own sake, as well as yours, I will not rashly encounter danger.
I will be cool, persevering, and prudent.
But success SHALL crown my endeavours.
Wherefore not?
Thus far I have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph.
Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element?
What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man?
My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus.
But I must finish.
Heaven bless my beloved sister!
R.W.
Letter 4
August 5th, 17--
To Mrs. Saville, England
So strange an accident has happened to us that I cannot forbear recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before these papers can come into your possession.
Last Monday (July 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she floated.
Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were compassed round by a very thick fog.
We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.
About two o'clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to have no end.
Some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own situation.
We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half a mile; a being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge and guided the dogs.
We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the ice.
This appearance excited our unqualified wonder.
We were, as we believed, many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed.
Shut in, however, by ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the greatest attention.
About two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship.
We, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice.
I profited of this time to rest for a few hours.
In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon deck and found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently talking to someone in the sea.
It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on a large fragment of ice.
Only one dog remained alive; but there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel.
He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European.
When I appeared on deck the master said, "Here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish on the open sea."
On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent.
"Before I come on board your vessel," said he, "will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?"
You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom I should have supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford.
I replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole.
Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
Good God!
Margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been boundless.
His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering.
I never saw a man in so wretched a condition.
We attempted to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quitted the fresh air he fainted.
We accordingly brought him back to the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity.
As soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen stove.
By slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully.
Two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding.
When he had in some measure recovered, I removed him to my own cabin and attended on him as much as my duty would permit.
I never saw a more interesting creature:  his eyes have generally an expression of wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone performs an act of kindness towards him or does him any the most trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that I never saw equalled.
But he is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him.
When my guest was a little recovered I had great trouble to keep off the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but I would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of body and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose.
Once, however, the lieutenant asked why he had come so far upon the ice in so strange a vehicle.
His countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom, and he replied, "To seek one who fled from me."
"And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?"
"Yes."
"Then I fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice."
This aroused the stranger's attention, and he asked a multitude of questions concerning the route which the demon, as he called him, had pursued.
Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, "I have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries."
"Certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine."
"And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you have benevolently restored me to life."
Soon after this he inquired if I thought that the breaking up of the ice had destroyed the other sledge.
I replied that I could not answer with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place of safety before that time; but of this I could not judge.
From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the stranger.
He manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for the sledge which had before appeared; but I have persuaded him to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
I have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight.
Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the present day.
The stranger has gradually improved in health but is very silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin.
Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all interested in him, although they have had very little communication with him.
For my own part, I begin to love him as a brother, and his constant and deep grief fills me with sympathy and compassion.
He must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable.
I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should find no friend on the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, before his spirit had been broken by misery, I should have been happy to have possessed as the brother of my heart.
I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, should I have any fresh incidents to record.
August 13th, 17--
My affection for my guest increases every day.
He excites at once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree.
How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief?
He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and when he speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.
He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own.
Yet, although unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he interests himself deeply in the projects of others.
He has frequently conversed with me on mine, which I have communicated to him without disguise.
He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken to secure it.
I was easily led by the sympathy which he evinced to use the language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise.
One man's life or death were but a small price to pay for the acquirement of the knowledge which I sought, for the dominion I should acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race.
As I spoke, a dark gloom spread over my listener's countenance.
At first I perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as I beheld tears trickle fast from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heaving breast.
I paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents:  "Unhappy man!
Do you share my madness?
Have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught?
Hear me; let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!"
Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were necessary to restore his composure.
Having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally.
He asked me the history of my earlier years.
The tale was quickly told, but it awakened various trains of reflection.
I spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man could boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.
"I agree with you," replied the stranger; "we are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselves--such a friend ought to be--do not lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures.
I once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship.
You have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for despair.
But I--I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew."
As he said this his countenance became expressive of a calm, settled grief that touched me to the heart.
But he was silent and presently retired to his cabin.
Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature.
The starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of elevating his soul from earth.
Such a man has a double existence:  he may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures.
Will you smile at the enthusiasm I express concerning this divine wanderer?
You would not if you saw him.
You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man.
Sometimes I have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew.
I believe it to be an intuitive discernment, a quick but never-failing power of judgment, a penetration into the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.
August 19, 17--
Yesterday the stranger said to me, "You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes.
I had determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with me, but you have won me to alter my determination.
You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been.
I do not know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to you; yet, when I reflect that you are pursuing the same course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am, I imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of failure.
Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous.
Were we among the tamer scenes of nature I might fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I doubt but that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed."
You may easily imagine that I was much gratified by the offered communication, yet I could not endure that he should renew his grief by a recital of his misfortunes.
I felt the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power.
I expressed these feelings in my answer.
"I thank you," he replied, "for your sympathy, but it is useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled.
I wait but for one event, and then I shall repose in peace.
I understand your feeling," continued he, perceiving that I wished to interrupt him; "but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined."
He then told me that he would commence his narrative the next day when I should be at leisure.
This promise drew from me the warmest thanks.
I have resolved every night, when I am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during the day.
If I should be engaged, I will at least make notes.
This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who know him, and who hear it from his own lips--with what interest and sympathy shall I read it in some future day!
Even now, as I commence my task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me with all their melancholy sweetness; I see his thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul within.
Strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it--thus!
Chapter 1
I am by birth a Genevese, and my family is one of the most distinguished of that republic.
My ancestors had been for many years counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation.
He was respected by all who knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public business.
He passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of circumstances had prevented his marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he became a husband and the father of a family.
As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, I cannot refrain from relating them.
One of his most intimate friends was a merchant who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous mischances, into poverty.
This man, whose name was Beaufort, was of a proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence.
Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness.
My father loved Beaufort with the truest friendship and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances.
He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a conduct so little worthy of the affection that united them.
He lost no time in endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance.
Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten months before my father discovered his abode.
Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the Reuss.
But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him.
Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant's house.
The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had leisure for reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.
His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that there was no other prospect of support.
But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her adversity.
She procured plain work; she plaited straw and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life.
Several months passed in this manner.
Her father grew worse; her time was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar.
This last blow overcame her, and she knelt by Beaufort's coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber.
He came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva and placed her under the protection of a relation.
Two years after this event Caroline became his wife.
There was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection.
There was a sense of justice in my father's upright mind which rendered it necessary that he should approve highly to love strongly.
Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a greater value on tried worth.
There was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her virtues and a desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her.
Everything was made to yield to her wishes and her convenience.
He strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and benevolent mind.
Her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through.
During the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders, as a restorative for her weakened frame.
From Italy they visited Germany and France.
I, their eldest child, was born at Naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles.
I remained for several years their only child.
Much as they were attached to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me.
My mother's tender caresses and my father's smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding me are my first recollections.
I was their plaything and their idol, and something better--their child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on them by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled their duties towards me.
With this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of self-control, I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me.
For a long time I was their only care.
My mother had much desired to have a daughter, but I continued their single offspring.
When I was about five years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of Italy, they passed a week on the shores of the Lake of Como.
Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor.
This, to my mother, was more than a duty; it was a necessity, a passion--remembering what she had suffered, and how she had been relieved--for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the afflicted.
During one of their walks a poor cot in the foldings of a vale attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape.
One day, when my father had gone by himself to Milan, my mother, accompanied by me, visited this abode.
She found a peasant and his wife, hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to five hungry babes.
Among these there was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest.
She appeared of a different stock.
The four others were dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair.
Her hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing, seemed to set a crown of distinction on her head.
Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent, and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.
The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history.
She was not her child, but the daughter of a Milanese nobleman.
Her mother was a German and had died on giving her birth.
The infant had been placed with these good people to nurse:  they were better off then.
They had not been long married, and their eldest child was but just born.
The father of their charge was one of those Italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory of Italy--one among the schiavi ognor frementi, who exerted himself to obtain the liberty of his country.
He became the victim of its weakness.
Whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of Austria was not known.
His property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and a beggar.
She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.
When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub--a creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills.
The apparition was soon explained.
With his permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her.
They were fond of the sweet orphan.
Her presence had seemed a blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection.
They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents' house--my more than sister--the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures.
Everyone loved Elizabeth.
The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight.
On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had said playfully, "I have a pretty present for my Victor--tomorrow he shall have it."
And when, on the morrow, she presented Elizabeth to me as her promised gift, I, with childish seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon Elizabeth as mine--mine to protect, love, and cherish.
All praises bestowed on her I received as made to a possession of my own.
We called each other familiarly by the name of cousin.
No word, no expression could body forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me--my more than sister, since till death she was to be mine only.
Chapter 2
We were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in our ages.
I need not say that we were strangers to any species of disunion or dispute.
Harmony was the soul of our companionship, and the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us nearer together.
Elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a more intense application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
She busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets; and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our Swiss home --the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons, tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of our Alpine summers--she found ample scope for admiration and delight.
While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their causes.
The world was to me a secret which I desired to divine.
Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember.
On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country.
We possessed a house in Geneva, and a campagne on Belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a league from the city.
We resided principally in the latter, and the lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion.
It was my temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervently to a few.
I was indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but I united myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them.
Henry Clerval was the son of a merchant of Geneva.
He was a boy of singular talent and fancy.
He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake.
He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance.
He composed heroic songs and began to write many a tale of enchantment and knightly adventure.
He tried to make us act plays and to enter into masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of Roncesvalles, of the Round Table of King Arthur, and the chivalrous train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands of the infidels.
No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself.
My parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
We felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights which we enjoyed.
When I mingled with other families I distinctly discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted the development of filial love.
My temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things indiscriminately.
I confess that neither the structure of languages, nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states possessed attractions for me.
It was the secrets of heaven and earth that I desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.
Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral relations of things.
The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes, and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species.
The saintly soul of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home.
Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us.
She was the living spirit of love to soften and attract; I might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness.
And Clerval--could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of Clerval?
Yet he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition.
I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self.
Besides, in drawing the picture of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.
Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my predilection for that science.
When I was thirteen years of age we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon; the inclemency of the weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn.
In this house I chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa.
I opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm.
A new light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father.
My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, "Ah!
Cornelius Agrippa!
My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash."
If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies.
It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin.
But the cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was acquainted with its contents, and I continued to read with the greatest avidity.
When I returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus.
I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me treasures known to few besides myself.
I have described myself as always having been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of nature.
In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
Sir Isaac Newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth.
Those of his successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom I was acquainted appeared even to my boy's apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same pursuit.
The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted with their practical uses.
The most learned philosopher knew little more.
He had partially unveiled the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery.
He might dissect, anatomize, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him.
I had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined.
But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew more.
I took their word for all that they averred, and I became their disciple.
It may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth century; but while I followed the routine of education in the schools of Geneva, I was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite studies.
My father was not scientific, and I was left to struggle with a child's blindness, added to a student's thirst for knowledge.
Under the guidance of my new preceptors I entered with the greatest diligence into the search of the philosopher's stone and the elixir of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention.
Wealth was an inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if I could banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but a violent death!
Nor were these my only visions.
The raising of ghosts or devils was a promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors.
And thus for a time I was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm.
It advanced from behind the mountains of Jura, and the thunder burst at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens.
I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of fire issue from an old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump.
When we visited it the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singular manner.
It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood.
I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed.
Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity.
On this occasion a man of great research in natural philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my accustomed studies.
It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known.
All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable.
By one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of real knowledge.
In this mood of mind I betook myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.
Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin.
When I look back, it seems to me as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life--the last effort made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me.
Her victory was announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting studies.
It was thus that I was to be taught to associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.
It was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and terrible destruction.
Chapter 3
When I had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt.
I had hitherto attended the schools of Geneva, but my father thought it necessary for the completion of my education that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country.
My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurred--an omen, as it were, of my future misery.
Elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was in the greatest danger.
During her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her.
She had at first yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety.
She attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity of the distemper--Elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her preserver.
On the third day my mother sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event.
On her deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her.
She joined the hands of Elizabeth and myself.
"My children," she said, "my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the prospect of your union.
This expectation will now be the consolation of your father.
Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children.
Alas!
I regret that I am taken from you; and, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all?
But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world."
She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
I need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance.
It is so long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day and whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have departed forever--that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be heard.
These are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences.
Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connection?
And why should I describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel?
The time at length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished.
My mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.
My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon.
I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks.
It appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose, akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of life.
I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me.
I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above all, I desired to see my sweet Elizabeth in some degree consoled.
She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all.
She looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and zeal.
She devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call her uncle and cousins.
Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
The day of my departure at length arrived.
Clerval spent the last evening with us.
He had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to accompany me and to become my fellow student, but in vain.
His father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the aspirations and ambition of his son.
Henry deeply felt the misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education.
He said little, but when he spoke I read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details of commerce.
We sat late.
We could not tear ourselves away from each other nor persuade ourselves to say the word "Farewell!"
It was said, and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived; but when at morning's dawn I descended to the carriage which was to convey me away, they were all there--my father again to bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth to renew her entreaties that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.
I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away and indulged in the most melancholy reflections.
I, who had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure--I was now alone.
In the university whither I was going I must form my own friends and be my own protector.
My life had hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances.
I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these were "old familiar faces," but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers.
Such were my reflections as I commenced my journey; but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose.
I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge.
I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings.
Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent.
I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing.
At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes.
I alighted and was conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as I pleased.
The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction and paid a visit to some of the principal professors.
Chance--or rather the evil influence, the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father's door--led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy.
He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science.
He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy.
I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied.
The professor stared.
"Have you," he said, "really spent your time in studying such nonsense?"
I replied in the affirmative.
"Every minute," continued M. Krempe with warmth, "every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost.
You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names.
Good God!
In what desert land have you lived, where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you have so greedily imbibed are a thousand years old and as musty as they are ancient?
I little expected, in this enlightened and scientific age, to find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus.
My dear sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew."
So saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several books treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted.
I returned home not disappointed, for I have said that I had long considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but I returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any shape.
M. Krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of his pursuits.
In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the conclusions I had come to concerning them in my early years.
As a child I had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science.
With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists.
Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy.
It was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed.
The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in science was chiefly founded.
I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.
Such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new abode.
But as the ensuing week commenced, I thought of the information which M. Krempe had given me concerning the lectures.
And although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.
Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after.
This professor was very unlike his colleague.
He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black.
His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard.
He began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers.
He then took a cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of its elementary terms.
After having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I shall never forget:  "The ancient teachers of this science," said he, "promised impossibilities and performed nothing.
The modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles.
They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places.
They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe.
They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows."
Such were the professor's words--rather let me say such the words of the fate--enounced to destroy me.
As he went on I felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception, one purpose.
So much has been done, exclaimed the soul of Frankenstein--more, far more, will I achieve; treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.
I closed not my eyes that night.
My internal being was in a state of insurrection and turmoil; I felt that order would thence arise, but I had no power to produce it.
By degrees, after the morning's dawn, sleep came.
I awoke, and my yesternight's thoughts were as a dream.
There only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to devote myself to a science for which I believed myself to possess a natural talent.
On the same day I paid M. Waldman a visit.
His manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public, for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness.
I gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as I had given to his fellow professor.
He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that M. Krempe had exhibited.
He said that "These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge.
They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light.
The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind."
I listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudices against modern chemists; I expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours.
I requested his advice concerning the books I ought to procure.
"I am happy," said M. Waldman, "to have gained a disciple; and if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt of your success.
Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, I have not neglected the other branches of science.
A man would make but a very sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge alone.
If your wish is to become really a man of science and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics."
He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses of his various machines, instructing me as to what I ought to procure and promising me the use of his own when I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism.
He also gave me the list of books which I had requested, and I took my leave.
Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.
Chapter 4
From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
I read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects.
I attended the lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the university, and I found even in M. Krempe a great deal of sound sense and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable.
In M. Waldman I found a true friend.
His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry.
In a thousand ways he smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension.
My application was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded and soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the light of morning whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory.
As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid.
My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and my proficiency that of the masters.
Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress.
Two years passed in this manner, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which I hoped to make.
None but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science.
In other studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder.
A mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues one study must infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and I, who continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was solely wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two years I made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university.
When I had arrived at this point and had become as well acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident happened that protracted my stay.
One of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life.
Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed?
It was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries.
I revolved these circumstances in my mind and determined thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of natural philosophy which relate to physiology.
Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome and almost intolerable.
To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death.
I became acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body.
In my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors.
I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of superstition or to have feared the apparition of a spirit.
Darkness had no effect upon my fancy, and a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become food for the worm.
Now I was led to examine the cause and progress of this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and charnel-houses.
My attention was fixed upon every object the most insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings.
I saw how the fine form of man was degraded and wasted; I beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain.
I paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me--a light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret.
Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman.
The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens than that which I now affirm is true.
Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery were distinct and probable.
After days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter.
The astonishment which I had at first experienced on this discovery soon gave place to delight and rapture.
After so much time spent in painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires was the most gratifying consummation of my toils.
But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the steps by which I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result.
What had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of the world was now within my grasp.
Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon me at once:  the information I had obtained was of a nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as I should point them towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already accomplished.
I was like the Arabian who had been buried with the dead and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light.
I see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with which I am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end of my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject.
I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was, to your destruction and infallible misery.
Learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature will allow.
When I found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I hesitated a long time concerning the manner in which I should employ it.
Although I possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable difficulty and labour.
I doubted at first whether I should attempt the creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man.
The materials at present within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed.
I prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered the improvement which every day takes place in science and mechanics, I was encouraged to hope my present attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success.
Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability.
It was with these feelings that I began the creation of a human being.
As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the being of a gigantic stature, that is to say, about eight feet in height, and proportionably large.
After having formed this determination and having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my materials, I began.
No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success.
Life and death appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world.
A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me.
No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should deserve theirs.
Pursuing these reflections, I thought that if I could bestow animation upon lifeless matter, I might in process of time (although I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.
These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour.
My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement.
Sometimes, on the very brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realize.
One secret which I alone possessed was the hope to which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places.
Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay?
My limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but then a resistless and almost frantic impulse urged me forward; I seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit.
It was indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had returned to my old habits.
I collected bones from charnel-houses and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame.
In a solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house, and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in attending to the details of my employment.
The dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials; and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near to a conclusion.
The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit.
It was a most beautiful season; never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature.
And the same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I had not seen for so long a time.
I knew my silence disquieted them, and I well remembered the words of my father:  "I know that while you are pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall hear regularly from you.
You must pardon me if I regard any interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your other duties are equally neglected."
I knew well therefore what would be my father's feelings, but I could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination.
I wished, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed.
I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect to vice or faultiness on my part, but I am now convinced that he was justified in conceiving that I should not be altogether free from blame.
A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity.
I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule.
If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind.
If this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved, Caesar would have spared his country, America would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been destroyed.
But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting part of my tale, and your looks remind me to proceed.
My father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves--sights which before always yielded me supreme delight--so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation.
The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a close, and now every day showed me more plainly how well I had succeeded.
But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow creatures as if I had been guilty of a crime.
Sometimes I grew alarmed at the wreck I perceived that I had become; the energy of my purpose alone sustained me:  my labours would soon end, and I believed that exercise and amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and I promised myself both of these when my creation should be complete.
Chapter 5
It was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the accomplishment of my toils.
With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I collected the instruments of life around me, that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet.
It was already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs.
How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to form?
His limbs were in proportion, and I had selected his features as beautiful.
Beautiful!
Great God!
His yellow skin scarcely covered the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous black, and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes, that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.
The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of human nature.
I had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body.
For this I had deprived myself of rest and health.
I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that I had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart.
Unable to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I rushed out of the room and continued a long time traversing my bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep.
At length lassitude succeeded to the tumult I had before endured, and I threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of forgetfulness.
But it was in vain; I slept, indeed, but I was disturbed by the wildest dreams.
I thought I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in the streets of Ingolstadt.
Delighted and surprised, I embraced her, but as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and I thought that I held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
I started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window shutters, I beheld the wretch--the miserable monster whom I had created.
He held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were fixed on me.
His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks.
He might have spoken, but I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped and rushed downstairs.
I took refuge in the courtyard belonging to the house which I inhabited, where I remained during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which I had so miserably given life.
Oh!
No mortal could support the horror of that countenance.
A mummy again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch.
I had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have conceived.
I passed the night wretchedly.
Sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and hardly that I felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, I nearly sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness.
Mingled with this horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become a hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!
Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour.
The porter opened the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my view.
I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky.
I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind.
I traversed the streets without any clear conception of where I was or what I was doing.
My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:
Like one who, on a lonely road,   Doth walk in fear and dread,   And, having once turned round, walks on,   And turns no more his head;   Because he knows a frightful fiend   Doth close behind him tread.
[Coleridge's "Ancient Mariner."]
Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the various diligences and carriages usually stopped.
Here I paused, I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming towards me from the other end of the street.
As it drew nearer I observed that it was the Swiss diligence; it stopped just where I was standing, and on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out.
"My dear Frankenstein," exclaimed he, "how glad I am to see you!
How fortunate that you should be here at the very moment of my alighting!"
Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval; his presence brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollection.
I grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my horror and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months, calm and serene joy.
I welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial manner, and we walked towards my college.
Clerval continued talking for some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to Ingolstadt.
"You may easily believe," said he, "how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of book-keeping; and, indeed, I believe I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield:  'I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.'
But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge."
"It gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left my father, brothers, and Elizabeth."
"Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from you so seldom.
By the by, I mean to lecture you a little upon their account myself.
But, my dear Frankenstein," continued he, stopping short and gazing full in my face, "I did not before remark how very ill you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several nights."
"You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one occupation that I have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see; but I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an end and that I am at length free."
I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night.
I walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college.
I then reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my apartment might still be there, alive and walking about.
I dreaded to behold this monster, but I feared still more that Henry should see him.
Entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room.
My hand was already on the lock of the door before I recollected myself.
I then paused, and a cold shivering came over me.
I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared.
I stepped fearfully in:  the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest.
I could hardly believe that so great a good fortune could have befallen me, but when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, I clapped my hands for joy and ran down to Clerval.
We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself.
It was not joy only that possessed me; I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly.
I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
Clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival, but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter frightened and astonished him.
"My dear Victor," cried he, "what, for God's sake, is the matter?
Do not laugh in that manner.
How ill you are!
What is the cause of all this?"
"Do not ask me," cried I, putting my hands before my eyes, for I thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; "HE can tell.
Oh, save me!
Save me!"
I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a fit.
Poor Clerval!
What must have been his feelings?
A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness.
But I was not the witness of his grief, for I was lifeless and did not recover my senses for a long, long time.
This was the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for several months.
During all that time Henry was my only nurse.
I afterwards learned that, knowing my father's advanced age and unfitness for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my disorder.
He knew that I could not have a more kind and attentive nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that he could towards them.
But I was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life.
The form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was forever before my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him.
Doubtless my words surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which I continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.
By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and grieved my friend, I recovered.
I remember the first time I became capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, I perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window.
It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence.
I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time I became as cheerful as before I was attacked by the fatal passion.
"Dearest Clerval," exclaimed I, "how kind, how very good you are to me.
This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room.
How shall I ever repay you?
I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I have been the occasion, but you will forgive me."
"You will repay me entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?"
I trembled.
One subject!
What could it be?
Could he allude to an object on whom I dared not even think?
"Compose yourself," said Clerval, who observed my change of colour, "I will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your own handwriting.
They hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at your long silence."
"Is that all, my dear Henry?
How could you suppose that my first thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom I love and who are so deserving of my love?"
"If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to see a letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is from your cousin, I believe."
Chapter 6
Clerval then put the following letter into my hands.
It was from my own Elizabeth:
"My dearest Cousin,
"You have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear kind Henry are not sufficient to reassure me on your account.
You are forbidden to write--to hold a pen; yet one word from you, dear Victor, is necessary to calm our apprehensions.
For a long time I have thought that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt.
I have prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so long a journey, yet how often have I regretted not being able to perform it myself!
I figure to myself that the task of attending on your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin.
Yet that is over now:  Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better.
I eagerly hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
"Get well--and return to us.
You will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you dearly.
Your father's health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance.
How pleased you would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest!
He is now sixteen and full of activity and spirit.
He is desirous to be a true Swiss and to enter into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his elder brother returns to us.
My uncle is not pleased with the idea of a military career in a distant country, but Ernest never had your powers of application.
He looks upon study as an odious fetter; his time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake.
I fear that he will become an idler unless we yield the point and permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected.
"Little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken place since you left us.
The blue lake and snow-clad mountains--they never change; and I think our placid home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same immutable laws.
My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I am rewarded for any exertions by seeing none but happy, kind faces around me.
Since you left us, but one change has taken place in our little household.
Do you remember on what occasion Justine Moritz entered our family?
Probably you do not; I will relate her history, therefore in a few words.
Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third.
This girl had always been the favourite of her father, but through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and after the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill.  My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at our house.
The republican institutions of our country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which prevail in the great monarchies that surround it.
Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and moral.
A servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant in France and England.
Justine, thus received in our family, learned the duties of a servant, a condition which, in our fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being.
"Justine, you may remember, was a great favourite of yours; and I recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one glance from Justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of Angelica--she looked so frank-hearted and happy.
My aunt conceived a great attachment for her, by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that which she had at first intended.
This benefit was fully repaid; Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world:  I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt.
She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her.
"When my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most anxious affection.
Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her.
"One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless.
The conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the deaths of her favourites was a judgement from heaven to chastise her partiality.
She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had conceived.
Accordingly, a few months after your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother.
Poor girl!
She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable for vivacity.
Nor was her residence at her mother's house of a nature to restore her gaiety.
The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance.
She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her brothers and sister.
Perpetual fretting at length threw Madame Moritz into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is now at peace for ever.
She died on the first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of this last winter.
Justine has just returned to us; and I assure you I love her tenderly.
She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expression continually remind me of my dear aunt.
"I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling William.
I wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair.
When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health.
He has already had one or two little WIVES, but Louisa Biron is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age.
"Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva.
The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq.
Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn.
Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of Clerval from Geneva.
But he has already recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier.
She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with everybody.
"I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety returns upon me as I conclude.
Write, dearest Victor,--one line--one word will be a blessing to us.
Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful.
Adieu!
my cousin; take care of your self; and, I entreat you, write!
"Elizabeth Lavenza.
"Geneva, March 18, 17--."
"Dear, dear Elizabeth!"
I exclaimed, when I had read her letter:  "I will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety they must feel."
I wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly.
In another fortnight I was able to leave my chamber.
One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval to the several professors of the university.
In doing this, I underwent a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained.
Ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the beginning of my misfortunes, I had conceived a violent antipathy even to the name of natural philosophy.
When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my nervous symptoms.
Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view.
He had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that I had acquired a dislike for the room which had previously been my laboratory.
But these cares of Clerval were made of no avail when I visited the professors.
M. Waldman inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress I had made in the sciences.
He soon perceived that I disliked the subject; but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out.
What could I do?
He meant to please, and he tormented me.
I felt as if he had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments which were to be afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel death.
I writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain I felt.
Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn.
I thanked my friend from my heart, but I did not speak.
I saw plainly that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and although I loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence that knew no bounds, yet I could never persuade myself to confide in him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which I feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.
M. Krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even more pain than the benevolent approbation of M. Waldman.
"D--n the fellow!"
cried he; "why, M. Clerval, I assure you he has outstript us all.
Ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true.
A youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in Cornelius Agrippa as firmly as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.--Ay, ay," continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering, "M. Frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man.
Young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clerval:  I was myself when young; but that wears out in a very short time."
M. Krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.
Clerval had never sympathized in my tastes for natural science; and his literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me.
He came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of life he had marked out for himself.
Resolved to pursue no inglorious career, he turned his eyes toward the East, as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise.
The Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit languages engaged his attention, and I was easily induced to enter on the same studies.
Idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that I wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, I felt great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists.
I did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of their dialects, for I did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary amusement.
I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours.
Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country.
When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,--in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart.
How different from the manly and heroical poetry of Greece and Rome!
Summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to Geneva was fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable, and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring.
I felt this delay very bitterly; for I longed to see my native town and my beloved friends.
My return had only been delayed so long, from an unwillingness to leave Clerval in a strange place, before he had become acquainted with any of its inhabitants.
The winter, however, was spent cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.
The month of May had already commenced, and I expected the letter daily which was to fix the date of my departure, when Henry proposed a pedestrian tour in the environs of Ingolstadt, that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited.
I acceded with pleasure to this proposition:  I was fond of exercise, and Clerval had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature that I had taken among the scenes of my native country.
We passed a fortnight in these perambulations:  my health and spirits had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the salubrious air I breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and the conversation of my friend.
Study had before secluded me from the intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered me unsocial; but Clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
Excellent friend!
how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to elevate my mind until it was on a level with your own.
A selfish pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and affection warmed and opened my senses; I became the same happy creature who, a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care.
When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful sensations.
A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstasy.
The present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud.
I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an invincible burden.
Henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my feelings: he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that filled his soul.
The resources of his mind on this occasion were truly astonishing:  his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in imitation of the Persian and Arabic writers, he invented tales of wonderful fancy and passion.
At other times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew me out into arguments, which he supported with great ingenuity.
We returned to our college on a Sunday afternoon:  the peasants were dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy.
My own spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.
Chapter 7
On my return, I found the following letter from my father:--
"My dear Victor,
"You have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date of your return to us; and I was at first tempted to write only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which I should expect you.
But that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it.
What would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness?
And how, Victor, can I relate our misfortune?
Absence cannot have rendered you callous to our joys and griefs; and how shall I inflict pain on my long absent son?
I wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.
"William is dead!--that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay!
Victor, he is murdered!
"I will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the circumstances of the transaction.
"Last Thursday (May 7th), I, my niece, and your two brothers, went to walk in Plainpalais.
The evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged our walk farther than usual.
It was already dusk before we thought of returning; and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had gone on before, were not to be found.
We accordingly rested on a seat until they should return.
Presently Ernest came, and enquired if we had seen his brother; he said, that he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards waited for a long time, but that he did not return.
"This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he might have returned to the house.
He was not there.
We returned again, with torches; for I could not rest, when I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night; Elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish.
About five in the morning I discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had seen blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the print of the murder's finger was on his neck.
"He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my countenance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth.
She was very earnest to see the corpse.
At first I attempted to prevent her but she persisted, and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, 'O God!
I have murdered my darling child!'
"She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty.
When she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh.
She told me, that that same evening William had teased her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of your mother.
This picture is gone, and was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed.
We have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved William!
"Come, dearest Victor; you alone can console Elizabeth.
She weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death; her words pierce my heart.
We are all unhappy; but will not that be an additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter?
Your dear mother!
Alas, Victor!
I now say, Thank God she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!
"Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of festering, the wounds of our minds.
Enter the house of mourning, my friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not with hatred for your enemies.
"Your affectionate and afflicted father,                               "Alphonse Frankenstein.
"Geneva, May 12th, 17--."
Clerval, who had watched my countenance as I read this letter, was surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy I at first expressed on receiving new from my friends.
I threw the letter on the table, and covered my face with my hands.
"My dear Frankenstein," exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me weep with bitterness, "are you always to be unhappy?
My dear friend, what has happened?"
I motioned him to take up the letter, while I walked up and down the room in the extremest agitation.
Tears also gushed from the eyes of Clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune.
"I can offer you no consolation, my friend," said he; "your disaster is irreparable.
What do you intend to do?"
"To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the horses."
During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy.
"Poor William!"
said he, "dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother!
Who that had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss!
To die so miserably; to feel the murderer's grasp!
How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence!
Poor little fellow!
one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest.
The pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
A sod covers his gentle form, and he knows no pain.
He can no longer be a subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable survivors."
Clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words impressed themselves on my mind and I remembered them afterwards in solitude.
But now, as soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.
My journey was very melancholy.
At first I wished to hurry on, for I longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when I drew near my native town, I slackened my progress.
I could hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind.
I passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had not seen for nearly six years.
How altered every thing might be during that time!
One sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive.
Fear overcame me; I dared no advance, dreading a thousand nameless evils that made me tremble, although I was unable to define them.
I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind.
I contemplated the lake:  the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, 'the palaces of nature,' were not changed.
By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I continued my journey towards Geneva.
The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as I approached my native town.
I discovered more distinctly the black sides of Jura, and the bright summit of Mont Blanc.
I wept like a child.
"Dear mountains!
my own beautiful lake!
how do you welcome your wanderer?
Your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and placid.
Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?"
I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think of them with pleasure.
My country, my beloved country!
who but a native can tell the delight I took in again beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely lake!
Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me.
Night also closed around; and when I could hardly see the dark mountains, I felt still more gloomily.
The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings.
Alas!
I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the misery I imagined and dreaded, I did not conceive the hundredth part of the anguish I was destined to endure.
It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs of Geneva; the gates of the town were already shut; and I was obliged to pass the night at Secheron, a village at the distance of half a league from the city.
The sky was serene; and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved to visit the spot where my poor William had been murdered.
As I could not pass through the town, I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at Plainpalais.
During this short voyage I saw the lightning playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most beautiful figures.
The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might observe its progress.
It advanced; the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.
I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash over my head.
It was echoed from Saleve, the Juras, and the Alps of Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself from the preceding flash.
The storm, as is often the case in Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens.
The most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the lake which lies between the promontory of Belrive and the village of Copet.
Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Mole, a peaked mountain to the east of the lake.
While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step.
This noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; I clasped my hands, and exclaimed aloud, "William, dear angel!
this is thy funeral, this thy dirge!"
As I said these words, I perceived in the gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; I stood fixed, gazing intently:  I could not be mistaken.
A flash of lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy daemon, to whom I had given life.
What did he there?
Could he be (I shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother?
No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was forced to lean against a tree for support.
The figure passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom.
Nothing in human shape could have destroyed the fair child.
HE was the murderer!
I could not doubt it.
The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact.
I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly perpendicular ascent of Mont Saleve, a hill that bounds Plainpalais on the south.
He soon reached the summit, and disappeared.
I remained motionless.
The thunder ceased; but the rain still continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness.
I revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to forget: the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure.
Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and was this his first crime?
Alas!
I had turned loose into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother?
No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air.
But I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in scenes of evil and despair.
I considered the being whom I had cast among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me.
Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town.
The gates were open, and I hastened to my father's house.
My first thought was to discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be made.
But I paused when I reflected on the story that I had to tell.
A being whom I myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain.
I remembered also the nervous fever with which I had been seized just at the time that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable.
I well knew that if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I should have looked upon it as the ravings of insanity.
Besides, the strange nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited as to persuade my relatives to commence it.
And then of what use would be pursuit?
Who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Saleve?
These reflections determined me, and I resolved to remain silent.
It was about five in the morning when I entered my father's house.
I told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library to attend their usual hour of rising.
Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt.
Beloved and venerable parent!
He still remained to me.
I gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the mantel-piece.
It was an historical subject, painted at my father's desire, and represented Caroline Beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead father.
Her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity.
Below this picture was a miniature of William; and my tears flowed when I looked upon it.
While I was thus engaged, Ernest entered:  he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me:  "Welcome, my dearest Victor," said he.
"Ah!
I wish you had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and delighted.
You come to us now to share a misery which nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.--Poor William!
he was our darling and our pride!"
Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother's eyes; a sense of mortal agony crept over my frame.
Before, I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster.
I tried to calm Ernest; I enquired more minutely concerning my father, and here I named my cousin.
"She most of all," said Ernest, "requires consolation; she accused herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her very wretched.
But since the murderer has been discovered--"
"The murderer discovered!
Good God!
how can that be?
who could attempt to pursue him?
It is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw.
I saw him too; he was free last night!"
"I do not know what you mean," replied my brother, in accents of wonder, "but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery.
No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence.
Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?"
"Justine Moritz!
Poor, poor girl, is she the accused?
But it is wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?"
"No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt.
But she will be tried today, and you will then hear all."
He then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor William had been discovered, Justine had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days.
During this interval, one of the servants, happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer.
The servant instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to any of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their deposition, Justine was apprehended.
On being charged with the fact, the poor girl confirmed the suspicion in a great measure by her extreme confusion of manner.
This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and I replied earnestly, "You are all mistaken; I know the murderer.
Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent."
At that instant my father entered.
I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully; and, after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced some other topic than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed, "Good God, papa!
Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of poor William."
"We do also, unfortunately," replied my father, "for indeed I had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly."
"My dear father, you are mistaken; Justine is innocent."
"If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty.
She is to be tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted."
This speech calmed me.
I was firmly convinced in my own mind that Justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder.
I had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be brought forward strong enough to convict her.
My tale was not one to announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as madness by the vulgar.
Did any one indeed exist, except I, the creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance which I had let loose upon the world?
We were soon joined by Elizabeth.
Time had altered her since I last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of her childish years.
There was the same candour, the same vivacity, but it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect.
She welcomed me with the greatest affection.
"Your arrival, my dear cousin," said she, "fills me with hope.
You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless Justine.
Alas!
who is safe, if she be convicted of crime?
I rely on her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own.
Our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom I sincerely love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate.
If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more.
But she will not, I am sure she will not; and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little William."
"She is innocent, my Elizabeth," said I, "and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal."
"How kind and generous you are!
every one else believes in her guilt, and that made me wretched, for I knew that it was impossible:  and to see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing."
She wept.
"Dearest niece," said my father, "dry your tears.
If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality."
Chapter 8
We passed a few sad hours until eleven o'clock, when the trial was to commence.
My father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court.
During the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture.
It was to be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of my fellow beings:  one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and I the cause!
A thousand times rather would I have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to Justine, but I was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have been considered as the ravings of a madman and would not have exculpated her who suffered through me.
The appearance of Justine was calm.
She was dressed in mourning, and her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her feelings, exquisitely beautiful.
Yet she appeared confident in innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed.
She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as her confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to an appearance of courage.
When she entered the court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were seated.
A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly recovered herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest her utter guiltlessness.
The trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the charge, several witnesses were called.
Several strange facts combined against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof of her innocence as I had.
She had been out the whole of the night on which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found.
The woman asked her what she did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned a confused and unintelligible answer.
She returned to the house about eight o'clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly if anything had been heard concerning him.
When shown the body, she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days.
The picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket; and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the same which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.
Justine was called on for her defence.
As the trial had proceeded, her countenance had altered.
Surprise, horror, and misery were strongly expressed.
Sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible although variable voice.
"God knows," she said, "how entirely I am innocent.
But I do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; I rest my innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced against me, and I hope the character I have always borne will incline my judges to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears doubtful or suspicious."
She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she had passed the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the house of an aunt at Chene, a village situated at about a league from Geneva.
On her return, at about nine o'clock, she met a man who asked her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost.
She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain several hours of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known.
Most of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke.
It was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour to find my brother.
If she had gone near the spot where his body lay, it was without her knowledge.
That she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed a sleepless night and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain.
Concerning the picture she could give no account.
"I know," continued the unhappy victim, "how heavily and fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but I have no power of explaining it; and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been placed in my pocket.
But here also I am checked.
I believe that I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me wantonly.
Did the murderer place it there?
I know of no opportunity afforded him for so doing; or, if I had, why should he have stolen the jewel, to part with it again so soon?
"I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for hope.
I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on my innocence."
Several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come forward.
Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused, when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address the court.
"I am," said she, "the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or rather his sister, for I was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before his birth.
It may therefore be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion, but when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may say what I know of her character.
I am well acquainted with the accused.
I have lived in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly two years.
During all that period she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent of human creatures.
She nursed Madame Frankenstein, my aunt, in her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my uncle's house, where she was beloved by all the family.
She was warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a most affectionate mother.
For my own part, I do not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence.
She had no temptation for such an action; as to the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it, I should have willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her."
A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth's simple and powerful appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in favour of poor Justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude.
She herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer.
My own agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial.
I believed in her innocence; I knew it.
Could the demon who had (I did not for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy?
I could not sustain the horror of my situation, and when I perceived that the popular voice and the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the court in agony.
The tortures of the accused did not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.
I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness.
In the morning I went to the court; my lips and throat were parched.
I dared not ask the fatal question, but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my visit.
The ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and Justine was condemned.
I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt.
I had before experienced sensations of horror, and I have endeavoured to bestow upon them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured.
The person to whom I addressed myself added that Justine had already confessed her guilt.
"That evidence," he observed, "was hardly required in so glaring a case, but I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive."
This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean?
Had my eyes deceived me?
And was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be if I disclosed the object of my suspicions?
I hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.
"My cousin," replied I, "it is decided as you may have expected; all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty should escape.
But she has confessed."
This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon Justine's innocence.
"Alas!"
said she.
"How shall I ever again believe in human goodness?
Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
Her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has committed a murder."
Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my cousin.
My father wished her not to go but said that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide.
"Yes," said Elizabeth, "I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone."
The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet I could not refuse.
We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld Justine sitting on some straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on her knees.
She rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly.
My cousin wept also.
"Oh, Justine!"
said she.
"Why did you rob me of my last consolation?
I relied on your innocence, and although I was then very wretched, I was not so miserable as I am now."
"And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked?
Do you also join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?"
Her voice was suffocated with sobs.
"Rise, my poor girl," said Elizabeth; "why do you kneel, if you are innocent?
I am not one of your enemies, I believed you guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you had yourself declared your guilt.
That report, you say, is false; and be assured, dear Justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment, but your own confession."
"I did confess, but I confessed a lie.
I confessed, that I might obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins.
The God of heaven forgive me!
Ever since I was condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced, until I almost began to think that I was the monster that he said I was.
He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if I continued obdurate.
Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition.
What could I do?
In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly miserable."
She paused, weeping, and then continued, "I thought with horror, my sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
Dear William!
dearest blessed child!
I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am to suffer ignominy and death."
"Oh, Justine!
Forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
Why did you confess?
But do not mourn, dear girl.
Do not fear.
I will proclaim, I will prove your innocence.
I will melt the stony hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers.
You shall not die!
You, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
No!
No!
I never could survive so horrible a misfortune."
Justine shook her head mournfully.
"I do not fear to die," she said; "that pang is past.
God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the worst.
I leave a sad and bitter world; and if you remember me and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the fate awaiting me.
Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to the will of heaven!"
During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the prison room, where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me.
Despair!
Who dared talk of that?
The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as I did, such deep and bitter agony.
I gnashed my teeth and ground them together, uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul.
Justine started.
When she saw who it was, she approached me and said, "Dear sir, you are very kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believe that I am guilty?"
I could not answer.
"No, Justine," said Elizabeth; "he is more convinced of your innocence than I was, for even when he heard that you had confessed, he did not credit it."
"I truly thank him.
In these last moments I feel the sincerest gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness.
How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I am!
It removes more than half my misfortune, and I feel as if I could die in peace now that my innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin."
Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself.
She indeed gained the resignation she desired.
But I, the true murderer, felt the never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or consolation.
Elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness.
Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could extinguish.
We stayed several hours with Justine, and it was with great difficulty that Elizabeth could tear herself away.
"I wish," cried she, "that I were to die with you; I cannot live in this world of misery."
Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty repressed her bitter tears.
She embraced Elizabeth and said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, "Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer!
Live, and be happy, and make others so."
And on the morrow Justine died.
Elizabeth's heart-rending eloquence failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the criminality of the saintly sufferer.
My passionate and indignant appeals were lost upon them.
And when I received their cold answers and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips.
Thus I might proclaim myself a madman, but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim.
She perished on the scaffold as a murderess!
From the tortures of my own heart, I turned to contemplate the deep and voiceless grief of my Elizabeth.
This also was my doing!
And my father's woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was the work of my thrice-accursed hands!
Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not your last tears!
Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
Frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life in serving you--he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!
Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.
Chapter 9
Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope and fear.
Justine died, she rested, and I was alive.
The blood flowed freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my heart which nothing could remove.
Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much more (I persuaded myself) was yet behind.
Yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment when I should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow beings.
Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe.
This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained.
I shunned the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me; solitude was my only consolation--deep, dark, deathlike solitude.
My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
"Do you think, Victor," said he, "that I do not suffer also?
No one could love a child more than I loved your brother"--tears came into his eyes as he spoke--"but is it not a duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief?
It is also a duty owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for society."
This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my other sensations.
Now I could only answer my father with a look of despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.
About this time we retired to our house at Belrive.
This change was particularly agreeable to me.
The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o'clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that hour had rendered our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome to me.
I was now free.
Often, after the rest of the family had retired for the night, I took the boat and passed many hours upon the water.
Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by the wind; and sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, I left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections.
I was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly--if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the shore--often, I say, I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my calamities forever.
But I was restrained, when I thought of the heroic and suffering Elizabeth, whom I tenderly loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine.
I thought also of my father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose among them?
At these moments I wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my mind only that I might afford them consolation and happiness.
But that could not be.
Remorse extinguished every hope.
I had been the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness.
I had an obscure feeling that all was not over and that he would still commit some signal crime, which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past.
There was always scope for fear so long as anything I loved remained behind.
My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived.
When I thought of him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and I ardently wished to extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed.
When I reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds of moderation.
I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes, could I when there have precipitated him to their base.
I wished to see him again, that I might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and avenge the deaths of William and Justine.
Our house was the house of mourning.
My father's health was deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events.
Elizabeth was sad and desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed.
She was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects.
The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles.
"When I reflect, my dear cousin," said she, "on the miserable death of Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as they before appeared to me.
Before, I looked upon the accounts of vice and injustice that I read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other's blood.
Yet I am certainly unjust.
Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly she would have been the most depraved of human creatures.
For the sake of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if it had been her own!
I could not consent to the death of any human being, but certainly I should have thought such a creature unfit to remain in the society of men.
But she was innocent.
I know, I feel she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
Alas!
Victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can assure themselves of certain happiness?
I feel as if I were walking on the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss.
William and Justine were assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free, and perhaps respected.
But even if I were condemned to suffer on the scaffold for the same crimes, I would not change places with such a wretch."
I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony.
I, not in deed, but in effect, was the true murderer.
Elizabeth read my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, "My dearest friend, you must calm yourself.
These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am not so wretched as you are.
There is an expression of despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me tremble.
Dear Victor, banish these dark passions.
Remember the friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you.
Have we lost the power of rendering you happy?
Ah!
While we love, while we are true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native country, we may reap every tranquil blessing--what can disturb our peace?"
And could not such words from her whom I fondly prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my heart?
Even as she spoke I drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her.
Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were ineffectual.
I was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial influence could penetrate.
The wounded deer dragging its fainting limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had pierced it, and to die, was but a type of me.
Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations.
It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows.
My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix.
I had visited it frequently during my boyhood.
Six years had passed since then:  _I_ was a wreck, but nought had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.
I performed the first part of my journey on horseback.
I afterwards hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive injury on these rugged roads.
The weather was fine; it was about the middle of the month of August, nearly two months after the death of Justine, that miserable epoch from which I dated all my woe.
The weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in the ravine of Arve.
The immense mountains and precipices that overhung me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence--and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here displayed in their most terrific guise.
Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from among the trees formed a scene of singular beauty.
But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the habitations of another race of beings.
I passed the bridge of Pelissier, where the ravine, which the river forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend the mountain that overhangs it.
Soon after, I entered the valley of Chamounix.
This valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of Servox, through which I had just passed.
The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields.
Immense glaciers approached the road; I heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and marked the smoke of its passage.
Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding aiguilles, and its tremendous dome overlooked the valley.
A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this journey.
Some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and recognized, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the lighthearted gaiety of boyhood.
The very winds whispered in soothing accents, and maternal Nature bade me weep no more.
Then again the kindly influence ceased to act--I found myself fettered again to grief and indulging in all the misery of reflection.
Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all, myself--or, in a more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.
At length I arrived at the village of Chamounix.
Exhaustion succeeded to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had endured.
For a short space of time I remained at the window watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Blanc and listening to the rushing of the Arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath.
The same lulling sounds acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when I placed my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and blessed the giver of oblivion.
Chapter 10
I spent the following day roaming through the valley.
I stood beside the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to barricade the valley.
The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious presence-chamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawling waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws, was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in their hands.
These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving.
They elevated me from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my grief, they subdued and tranquillized it.
In some degree, also, they diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the last month.
I retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were, waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which I had contemplated during the day.
They congregated round me; the unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds--they all gathered round me and bade me be at peace.
Where had they fled when the next morning I awoke?
All of soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every thought.
The rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the summits of the mountains, so that I even saw not the faces of those mighty friends.
Still I would penetrate their misty veil and seek them in their cloudy retreats.
What were rain and storm to me?
My mule was brought to the door, and I resolved to ascend to the summit of Montanvert.
I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it.
It had then filled me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the effect of solemnizing my mind and causing me to forget the passing cares of life.
I determined to go without a guide, for I was well acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene.
The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the mountain.
It is a scene terrifically desolate.
In a thousand spots the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent, leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon other trees.
The path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw destruction upon the head of the speaker.
The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
I looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received from the objects around me.
Alas!
Why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings.
If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may convey to us.
We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
We rise; one wand'ring thought pollutes the day.
We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,    Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;   It is the same:  for, be it joy or sorrow,    The path of its departure still is free.
Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow;    Nought may endure but mutability!
It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent.
For some time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice.
A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains.
Presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier.
The surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep.
The field of ice is almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it.
The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock.
From the side where I now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league; and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty.
I remained in a recess of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene.
The sea, or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains, whose aerial summits hung over its recesses.
Their icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds.
My heart, which was before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; I exclaimed, "Wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life."
As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed.
He bounded over the crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with caution; his stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man.
I was troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize me, but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains.
I perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
that it was the wretch whom I had created.
I trembled with rage and horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in mortal combat.
He approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes.
But I scarcely observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt.
"Devil," I exclaimed, "do you dare approach me?
And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
Begone, vile insect!
Or rather, stay, that I may trample you to dust!
And, oh!
That I could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!"
"I expected this reception," said the daemon.
"All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things!
Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of us.
You purpose to kill me.
How dare you sport thus with life?
Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind.
If you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them and you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends."
"Abhorred monster!
Fiend that thou art!
The tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes.
Wretched devil!
You reproach me with your creation, come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark which I so negligently bestowed."
My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.
He easily eluded me and said,
"Be calm!
I entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred on my devoted head.
Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to increase my misery?
Life, although it may only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it.
Remember, thou hast made me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my joints more supple.
But I will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee.
I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part, the which thou owest me.
Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to every other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy clemency and affection, is most due.
Remember that I am thy creature; I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed.
Everywhere I see bliss, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded.
I was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend.
Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous."
"Begone!
I will not hear you.
There can be no community between you and me; we are enemies.
Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall."
"How can I move thee?
Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion?
Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone?
You, my creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your fellow creatures, who owe me nothing?
They spurn and hate me.
The desert mountains and dreary glaciers are my refuge.
I have wandered here many days; the caves of ice, which I only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the only one which man does not grudge.
These bleak skies I hail, for they are kinder to me than your fellow beings.
If the multitude of mankind knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for my destruction.
Shall I not then hate them who abhor me?
I will keep no terms with my enemies.
I am miserable, and they shall share my wretchedness.
Yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage.
Let your compassion be moved, and do not disdain me.
Listen to my tale; when you have heard that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve.
But hear me.
The guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned.
Listen to me, Frankenstein.
You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature.
Oh, praise the eternal justice of man!
Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me, and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands."
"Why do you call to my remembrance," I rejoined, "circumstances of which I shudder to reflect, that I have been the miserable origin and author?
Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light!
Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
You have made me wretched beyond expression.
You have left me no power to consider whether I am just to you or not.
Begone!
Relieve me from the sight of your detested form."
"Thus I relieve thee, my creator," he said, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; "thus I take from thee a sight which you abhor.
Still thou canst listen to me and grant me thy compassion.
By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you.
Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon the mountain.
The sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another world, you will have heard my story and can decide.
On you it rests, whether I quit forever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of your own speedy ruin."
As he said this he led the way across the ice; I followed.
My heart was full, and I did not answer him, but as I proceeded, I weighed the various arguments that he had used and determined at least to listen to his tale.
I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution.
I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion.
For the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a creator towards his creature were, and that I ought to render him happy before I complained of his wickedness.
These motives urged me to comply with his demand.
We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock.
The air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, I with a heavy heart and depressed spirits.
But I consented to listen, and seating myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began his tale.
Chapter 11
"It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original era of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard, and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before I learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses.
By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I was obliged to shut my eyes.
Darkness then came over me and troubled me, but hardly had I felt this when, by opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light poured in upon me again.
I walked and, I believe, descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with no obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid.
The light became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying me as I walked, I sought a place where I could receive shade.
This was the forest near Ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of a brook resting from my fatigue, until I felt tormented by hunger and thirst.
This roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some berries which I found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground.
I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.
"It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate.
Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of cold, I had covered myself with some clothes, but these were insufficient to secure me from the dews of night.
I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat down and wept.
"Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of pleasure.
I started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees.
[The moon]  I gazed with a kind of wonder.
It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries.
I was still cold when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with which I covered myself, and sat down upon the ground.
No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused.
I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with pleasure.
"Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had greatly lessened, when I began to distinguish my sensations from each other.
I gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with drink and the trees that shaded me with their foliage.
I was delighted when I first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had often intercepted the light from my eyes.
I began also to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me and to perceive the boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me.
Sometimes I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
Sometimes I wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence again.
"The moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a lessened form, showed itself, while I still remained in the forest.
My sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas.
My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another.
I found that the sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing.
"One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the warmth I experienced from it.
In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain.
How strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects!
I examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be composed of wood.
I quickly collected some branches, but they were wet and would not burn.
I was pained at this and sat still watching the operation of the fire.
The wet wood which I had placed near the heat dried and itself became inflamed.
I reflected on this, and by touching the various branches, I discovered the cause and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it and have a plentiful supply of fire.
When night came on and brought sleep with it, I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished.
I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank into sleep.
"It was morning when I awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame.
I observed this also and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the embers when they were nearly extinguished.
When night came again I found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food, for I found some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from the trees.
I tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on the live embers.
I found that the berries were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.
"Food, however, became scarce, and I often spent the whole day searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger.
When I found this, I resolved to quit the place that I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied.
In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of the fire which I had obtained through accident and knew not how to reproduce it.
I gave several hours to the serious consideration of this difficulty, but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, I struck across the wood towards the setting sun.
I passed three days in these rambles and at length discovered the open country.
A great fall of snow had taken place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found my feet chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the ground.
"It was about seven in the morning, and I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd.
This was a new sight to me, and I examined the structure with great curiosity.
Finding the door open, I entered.
An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast.
He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable.
His appearance, different from any I had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me.
But I was enchanted by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as Pandemonium appeared to the demons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire.
I greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherd's breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not like.
Then, overcome by fatigue, I lay down among some straw and fell asleep.
"It was noon when I awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant's breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at a village.
How miraculous did this appear!
The huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by turns.
The vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that I saw placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite.
One of the best of these I entered, but I had hardly placed my foot within the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces I had beheld in the village.
This hovel however, joined a cottage of a neat and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, I dared not enter it.
My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could with difficulty sit upright in it.
No wood, however, was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.
"Here, then, I retreated and lay down happy to have found a shelter, however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more from the barbarity of man.
As soon as morning dawned I crept from my kennel, that I might view the adjacent cottage and discover if I could remain in the habitation I had found.
It was situated against the back of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pig sty and a clear pool of water.
One part was open, and by that I had crept in; but now I covered every crevice by which I might be perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that I might move them on occasion to pass out; all the light I enjoyed came through the sty, and that was sufficient for me.
"Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I remembered too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power.
I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I could drink more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat.
The floor was a little raised, so that it was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm.
"Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel until something should occur which might alter my determination.
It was indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence, the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth.
I ate my breakfast with pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little water when I heard a step, and looking through a small chink, I beheld a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my hovel.
The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have since found cottagers and farmhouse servants to be.
Yet she was meanly dressed, a coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair hair was plaited but not adorned:  she looked patient yet sad.
I lost sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she returned bearing the pail, which was now partly filled with milk.
As she walked along, seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose countenance expressed a deeper despondence.
Uttering a few sounds with an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the cottage himself.
She followed, and they disappeared.
Presently I saw the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house and sometimes in the yard.
"On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows of the cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been filled up with wood.
In one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate.
Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean but very bare of furniture.
In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude.
The young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something out of a drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the nightingale.
It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before.
The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love.
He played a sweet mournful air which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of which the old man took no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet.
He raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I had never before experienced, either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and I withdrew from the window, unable to bear these emotions.
"Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood.
The girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese.
She seemed pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water, and then upon the fire.
She afterwards continued her work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots.
After he had been employed thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the cottage together.
"The old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance of his companions he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to eat.
The meal was quickly dispatched.
The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth.
Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures.
One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency.
The old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the fields.
"Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found that the cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbours.
In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations which I did not understand; and the old man again took up the instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in the morning.
So soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play, but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the harmony of the old man's instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew nothing of the science of words or letters.
"The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time, extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest."
Chapter 12
"I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep.
I thought of the occurrences of the day.
What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these people, and I longed to join them, but dared not.
I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present I would remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the motives which influenced their actions.
"The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun.
The young woman arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed after the first meal.
"This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations within.
The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation.
Nothing could exceed the love and respect which the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion.
They performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.
"They were not entirely happy.
The young man and his companion often went apart and appeared to weep.
I saw no cause for their unhappiness, but I was deeply affected by it.
If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched.
Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy?
They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one another's company and speech, interchanging each day looks of affection and kindness.
What did their tears imply?
Did they really express pain?
I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic.
"A considerable period elapsed before I discovered one of the causes of the uneasiness of this amiable family:  it was poverty, and they suffered that evil in a very distressing degree.
Their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters could scarcely procure food to support it.
They often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old man when they reserved none for themselves.
"This trait of kindness moved me sensibly.
I had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of their store for my own consumption, but when I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and roots which I gathered from a neighbouring wood.
"I discovered also another means through which I was enabled to assist their labours.
I found that the youth spent a great part of each day in collecting wood for the family fire, and during the night I often took his tools, the use of which I quickly discovered, and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.
"I remember, the first time that I did this, the young woman, when she opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on the outside.
She uttered some words in a loud voice, and the youth joined her, who also expressed surprise.
I observed, with pleasure, that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden.
"By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment.
I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to one another by articulate sounds.
I perceived that the words they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the minds and countenances of the hearers.
This was indeed a godlike science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it.
But I was baffled in every attempt I made for this purpose.
Their pronunciation was quick, and the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible objects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could unravel the mystery of their reference.
By great application, however, and after having remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, I discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, 'fire,' 'milk,' 'bread,' and 'wood.'
I learned also the names of the cottagers themselves.
The youth and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only one, which was 'father.'
The girl was called 'sister' or 'Agatha,' and the youth 'Felix,' 'brother,' or 'son.'
I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the ideas appropriated to each of these sounds and was able to pronounce them.
I distinguished several other words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as 'good,' 'dearest,' 'unhappy.'
"I spent the winter in this manner.
The gentle manners and beauty of the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when they were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathized in their joys.
I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the superior accomplishments of my friends.
The old man, I could perceive, often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes I found that he called them, to cast off their melancholy.
He would talk in a cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me.
Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her father.
It was not thus with Felix.
He was always the saddest of the group, and even to my unpractised senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply than his friends.
But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man.
"I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers.
In the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground.
Early in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand.
In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him.
At other times he worked in the garden, but as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man and Agatha.
"This reading had puzzled me extremely at first, but by degrees I discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when he talked.
I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper signs for speech which he understood, and I ardently longed to comprehend these also; but how was that possible when I did not even understand the sounds for which they stood as signs?
I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover myself to the cottagers, I ought not to make the attempt until I had first become master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted.
"I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers--their grace, beauty, and delicate complexions; but how was I terrified when I viewed myself in a transparent pool!
At first I started back, unable to believe that it was indeed I who was reflected in the mirror; and when I became fully convinced that I was in reality the monster that I am, I was filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
Alas!
I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity.
"As the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow vanished, and I beheld the bare trees and the black earth.
From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared.
Their food, as I afterwards found, was coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it.
Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced.
"The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did not rain, as I found it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters.
This frequently took place, but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.
"My mode of life in my hovel was uniform.
During the morning I attended the motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in various occupations, I slept; the remainder of the day was spent in observing my friends.
When they had retired to rest, if there was any moon or the night was star-light, I went into the woods and collected my own food and fuel for the cottage.
When I returned, as often as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and performed those offices that I had seen done by Felix.
I afterwards found that these labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words 'good spirit,' 'wonderful'; but I did not then understand the signification of these terms.
"My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad.
I thought (foolish wretch!)
that it might be in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people.
When I slept or was absent, the forms of the venerable blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the excellent Felix flitted before me.
I looked upon them as superior beings who would be the arbiters of my future destiny.
I formed in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of me.
I imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, I should first win their favour and afterwards their love.
"These thoughts exhilarated me and led me to apply with fresh ardour to the acquiring the art of language.
My organs were indeed harsh, but supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood with tolerable ease.
It was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and execration.
"The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the aspect of the earth.
Men who before this change seemed to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various arts of cultivation.
The birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves began to bud forth on the trees.
Happy, happy earth!
Fit habitation for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and unwholesome.
My spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil, and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy."
Chapter 13
"I now hasten to the more moving part of my story.
I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had been, have made me what I am.
"Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies cloudless.
It surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure.
My senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight and a thousand sights of beauty.
"It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested from labour--the old man played on his guitar, and the children listened to him--that I observed the countenance of Felix was melancholy beyond expression; he sighed frequently, and once his father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner that he inquired the cause of his son's sorrow.
Felix replied in a cheerful accent, and the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door.
"It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a country-man as a guide.
The lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black veil.
Agatha asked a question, to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of Felix.
Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends.
On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her veil, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression.
Her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink.
"Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed a degree of ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly have believed it capable; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger.
She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand to Felix, who kissed it rapturously and called her, as well as I could distinguish, his sweet Arabian.
She did not appear to understand him, but smiled.
He assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage.
Some conversation took place between him and his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old man's feet and would have kissed his hand, but he raised her and embraced her affectionately.
"I soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds and appeared to have a language of her own, she was neither understood by nor herself understood the cottagers.
They made many signs which I did not comprehend, but I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mists.
Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian.
Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to her brother, made signs which appeared to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she came.
Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of which I did not comprehend.
Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language; and the idea instantly occurred to me that I should make use of the same instructions to the same end.
The stranger learned about twenty words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which I had before understood, but I profited by the others.
"As night came on, Agatha and the Arabian retired early.
When they separated Felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, 'Good night sweet Safie.'
He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of their conversation.
I ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible.
"The next morning Felix went out to his work, and after the usual occupations of Agatha were finished, the Arabian sat at the feet of the old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes.
She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or dying away like a nightingale of the woods.
"When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first declined it.
She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger.
The old man appeared enraptured and said some words which Agatha endeavoured to explain to Safie, and by which he appeared to wish to express that she bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.
"The days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends.
Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of language, so that in two months I began to comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors.
"In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for I never ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same treatment I had formerly endured in the first village which I entered.
"My days were spent in close attention, that I might more speedily master the language; and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word that was spoken.
"While I improved in speech, I also learned the science of letters as it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field for wonder and delight.
"The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney's Ruins of Empires.
I should not have understood the purport of this book had not Felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations.
He had chosen this work, he said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the Eastern authors.
Through this work I obtained a cursory knowledge of history and a view of the several empires at present existing in the world; it gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different nations of the earth.
I heard of the slothful Asiatics, of the stupendous genius and mental activity of the Grecians, of the wars and wonderful virtue of the early Romans--of their subsequent degenerating--of the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings.
I heard of the discovery of the American hemisphere and wept with Safie over the hapless fate of its original inhabitants.
"These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings.
Was man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so vicious and base?
He appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and godlike.
To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm.
For a long time I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust and loathing.
"Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
While I listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed upon the Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me.
I heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood.
"The words induced me to turn towards myself.
I learned that the possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures were high and unsullied descent united with riches.
A man might be respected with only one of these advantages, but without either he was considered, except in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doomed to waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few!
And what was I?
Of my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant, but I knew that I possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property.
I was, besides, endued with a figure hideously deformed and loathsome; I was not even of the same nature as man.
I was more agile than they and could subsist upon coarser diet; I bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs.
When I looked around I saw and heard of none like me.
Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?
"I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me; I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with knowledge.
Oh, that I had forever remained in my native wood, nor known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!
"Of what a strange nature is knowledge!
It clings to the mind when it has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock.
I wished sometimes to shake off all thought and feeling, but I learned that there was but one means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death--a state which I feared yet did not understand.
I admired virtue and good feelings and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers, but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of becoming one among my fellows.
The gentle words of Agatha and  the animated smiles of the charming Arabian were not for me.
The mild exhortations of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved Felix were not for me.
Miserable, unhappy wretch!
"Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply.
I heard of the difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the father doted on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.
"But where were my friends and relations?
No father had watched my infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I distinguished nothing.
From my earliest remembrance I had been as I then was in height and proportion.
I had never yet seen a being resembling me or who claimed any intercourse with me.
What was I?
The question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.
"I will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow me now to return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so I loved, in an innocent, half-painful self-deceit, to call them)."
Chapter 14
"Some time elapsed before I learned the history of my friends.
It was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding as it did a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to one so utterly inexperienced as I was.
"The name of the old man was De Lacey.
He was descended from a good family in France, where he had lived for many years in affluence, respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals.
His son was bred in the service of his country, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the highest distinction.
A few months before my arrival they had lived in a large and luxurious city called Paris, surrounded by friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford.
"The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin.
He was a Turkish merchant and had inhabited Paris for many years, when, for some reason which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government.
He was seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie arrived from Constantinople to join him.
He was tried and condemned to death.
The injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all Paris was indignant; and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime alleged against him had been the cause of his condemnation.
"Felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the court.
He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked around for the means.
After many fruitless attempts to gain admittance to the prison, he found a strongly grated window in an unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate Muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the execution of the barbarous sentence.
Felix visited the grate at night and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour.
The Turk, amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer by promises of reward and wealth.
Felix rejected his offers with contempt, yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help owning to his own mind that the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.
"The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made on the heart of Felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety.
Felix was too delicate to accept this offer, yet he looked forward to the probability of the event as to the consummation of his happiness.
"During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old man, a servant of her father who understood French.
She thanked him in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.
"I have copies of these letters, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of Felix or Agatha.
Before I depart I will give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present, as the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to repeat the substance of them to you.
"Safie related that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of the father of Safie, who married her.
The young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the bondage to which she was now reduced.
She instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers of Muhammad.
This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of Safie, who sickened at the prospect of again returning to Asia and being immured within the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue.
The prospect of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her.
"The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the night previous to it he quitted his prison and before morning was distant many leagues from Paris.
Felix had procured passports in the name of his father, sister, and himself.
He had previously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris.
"Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable opportunity of passing into some part of the Turkish dominions.
"Safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in expectation of that event; and in the meantime he enjoyed the society of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest affection.
They conversed with one another through the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and Safie sang to him the divine airs of her native country.
"The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far other plans.
He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power of his deliverer if he should choose to betray him to the Italian state which they inhabited.
He revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when he departed.
His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris.
"The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of their victim and spared no pains to detect and punish his deliverer.
The plot of Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison.
The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure.
His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the free air and the society of her whom he loved.
This idea was torture to him.
He quickly arranged with the Turk that if the latter should find a favourable opportunity for escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder at a convent at Leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to Paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding.
"He did not succeed.
They remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country.
"They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them.
Felix soon learned that the treacherous Turk, for whom he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin, became a traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted Italy with his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.
"Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix and rendered him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of his family.
He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable.
The arrival of the Arabian now infused new life into his soul.
"When the news reached Leghorn that Felix was deprived of his wealth and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no more of her lover, but to prepare to return to her native country.
The generous nature of Safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate.
"A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter's apartment and told her hastily that he had reason to believe that his residence at Leghorn had been divulged and that he should speedily be delivered up to the French government; he had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to Constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours.
He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not yet arrived at Leghorn.
"When alone, Safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it would become her to pursue in this emergency.
A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it.
By some papers of her father which fell into her hands she heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where he then resided.
She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination.
Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant, a native of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey, and departed for Germany.
"She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill.  Safie nursed her with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world.
She fell, however, into good hands.
The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in which they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the cottage of her lover."
Chapter 15
"Such was the history of my beloved cottagers.
It impressed me deeply.
I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind.
"As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed.
But in giving an account of the progress of my intellect, I must not omit a circumstance which occurred in the beginning of the month of August of the same year.
"One night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where I collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, I found on the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and some books.
I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel.
Fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which I had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of Paradise Lost, a volume of Plutarch's Lives, and the Sorrows of Werter.
The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were employed in their ordinary occupations.
"I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books.
They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection.
In the Sorrows of Werter, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects that I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment.
The gentle and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which were forever alive in my own bosom.
But I thought Werter himself a more divine being than I had ever beheld or imagined; his character contained no pretension, but it sank deep.
The disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated to fill  me with wonder.
I did not pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely understanding it.
"As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own feelings and condition.
I found myself similar yet at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I was a listener.
I sympathized with and partly understood them, but I was unformed in mind; I was dependent on none and related to none.
'The path of my departure was free,' and there was none to lament my annihilation.
My person was hideous and my stature gigantic.
What did this mean?
Who was I?
What was I?
Whence did I come?
What was my destination?
These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to solve them.
"The volume of Plutarch's Lives which I possessed contained the histories of the first founders of the ancient republics.
This book had a far different effect upon me from the Sorrows of Werter.
I learned from Werter's imaginations despondency and gloom, but Plutarch taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages.
Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience.
I had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas.
But I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and large assemblages of men.
The cottage of my protectors had been the only school in which I had studied human nature, but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action.
I read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their species.
I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as far as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone.
Induced by these feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus and Theseus.
The patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have been imbued with different sensations.
"But Paradise Lost excited different and far deeper emotions.
I read it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as a true history.
It moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of exciting.
I often referred the several situations, as their similarity struck me, to my own.
Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect.
He had come forth from the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone.
Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me.
"Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings.
Soon after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the pocket of the dress which I had taken from your laboratory.
At first I had neglected them, but now that I was able to decipher the characters in which they were written, I began to study them with diligence.
It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation.
You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic occurrences.
You doubtless recollect these papers.
Here they are.
Everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own horrors and rendered mine indelible.
I sickened as I read.
'Hateful day when I received life!'
I exclaimed in agony.
'Accursed creator!
Why did you form a monster so hideous that even YOU turned from me in disgust?
God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the very resemblance.
Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire and encourage him, but I am solitary and abhorred.'
"These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude; but when I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that when they should become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they  would compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity.
Could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion and friendship?
I resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate.
I postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance attached to its success inspired me with a dread lest I should fail.
Besides, I found that my understanding improved so much with every day's experience that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months should have added to my sagacity.
"Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage.
The presence of Safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and I also found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there.
Felix and Agatha spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in their labours by servants.
They did not appear rich, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous.
Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was.
I cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my person reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade.
"I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial which in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathizing with my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation.
But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone.
I remembered Adam's supplication to his Creator.
But where was mine?
He had abandoned me, and in the bitterness of my heart I cursed him.
"Autumn passed thus.
I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon.
Yet I did not heed the bleakness of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat.
But my chief delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with more attention towards the cottagers.
Their happiness was not decreased by the absence of summer.
They loved and sympathized with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them.
The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition.
I dared not think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror.
The poor that stopped at their door were never driven away.
I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest:  I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it.
"The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place since I awoke into life.
My attention at this time was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my protectors.
I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly beheld me.
My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children I could gain the good will and mediation of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors.
"One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha, and Felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own desire, was left alone in the cottage.
When his children had departed, he took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before.
At first his countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.
"My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which would decide my hopes or realize my fears.
The servants were gone to a neighbouring fair.
All was silent in and around the cottage; it was an excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to execute my plan, my limbs failed me and I sank to the ground.
Again I rose, and exerting all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which I had placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat.
The fresh air revived me, and with renewed determination I approached the door of their cottage.
"I knocked.
'Who is there?'
said the old man.
'Come in.'
"I entered.
'Pardon this intrusion,' said I; 'I am a traveller in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.'
"'Enter,' said De Lacey, 'and I will try in what manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.'
"'Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and rest only that I need.'
"I sat down, and a silence ensued.
I knew that every minute was precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence the interview, when the old man addressed me.
'By your language, stranger, I suppose you are my countryman; are you French?'
"'No; but I was educated by a French family and understand that language only.
I am now going to claim the protection of some friends, whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.'
"'Are they Germans?'
"'No, they are French.
But let us change the subject.
I am an unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and I have no relation or friend upon earth.
These amiable people to whom I go have never seen me and know little of me.
I am full of fears, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world forever.'
"'Do not despair.
To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are full of brotherly love and charity.
Rely, therefore, on your hopes; and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.'
"'They are kind--they are the most excellent creatures in the world; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me.
I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable monster.'
"'That is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot you undeceive them?'
"'I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that I feel so many overwhelming terrors.
I tenderly love these friends; I have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.'
"'Where do these friends reside?'
"'Near this spot.'
"The old man paused and then continued, 'If you will unreservedly confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in undeceiving them.
I am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but there is something in your words which persuades me that you are sincere.
I am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.'
"'Excellent man!
I thank you and accept your generous offer.
You raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid, I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow creatures.'
"'Heaven forbid!
Even if you were really criminal, for that can only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue.
I also am unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.'
"'How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor?
From your lips first have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall be forever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success with those friends whom I am on the point of meeting.'
"'May I know the names and residence of those friends?'
"I paused.
This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to rob me of or bestow happiness on me forever.
I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud.
At that moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors.
I had not a moment to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, 'Now is the time!
Save and protect me!
You and your family are the friends whom I seek.
Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!'
"'Great God!'
exclaimed the old man.
'Who are you?'
"At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and Agatha entered.
Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me?
Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage.
Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently with a stick.
I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends the antelope.
But my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained.
I saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel."
Chapter 16
"Cursed, cursed creator!
Why did I live?
Why, in that instant, did I not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed?
I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were those of rage and revenge.
I could with pleasure have destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with their shrieks and misery.
"When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in fearful howlings.
I was like a wild beast that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness.
Oh!
What a miserable night I passed!
The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness.
All, save I, were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathized with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed the ruin.
"But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I became fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in the sick impotence of despair.
There was none among the myriads of men that existed who would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness towards my enemies?
No; from that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.
"The sun rose; I heard the voices of men and knew that it was impossible to return to my retreat during that day.
Accordingly I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection on my situation.
"The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some degree of tranquillity; and when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not help believing that I had been too hasty in my conclusions.
I had certainly acted imprudently.
It was apparent that my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and  I was a fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children.
I ought to have familiarized the old De Lacey to me, and by degrees to have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have been  prepared for my approach.
But I did not believe my errors to be irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to the cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my party.
"These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon I sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by peaceful dreams.
The horrible scene of the preceding day was forever acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father's feet.
I awoke exhausted, and finding that it was already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in search of food.
"When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage.
All there was at peace.
I crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the accustomed hour when the family arose.
That hour passed, the sun mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear.
I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune.
The inside of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe the agony of this suspense.
"Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country, which differed from that of my protectors.
Soon after, however, Felix approached with another man; I was surprised, as I knew that he had not quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.
"'Do you consider,' said his companion to him, 'that you will be obliged to pay three months' rent and to lose the produce of your garden?
I do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and I beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your determination.'
"'It is utterly useless,' replied Felix; 'we can never again inhabit your cottage.
The life of my father is in the greatest danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have related.
My wife and my sister will never recover from their horror.
I entreat you not to reason with me any more.
Take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this place.'
"Felix trembled violently as he said this.
He and his companion entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then departed.
I never saw any of the family of De Lacey more.
"I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of utter and stupid despair.
My protectors had departed and had broken the only link that held me to the world.
For the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive to control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my mind towards injury and death.
When I thought of my friends, of the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me.
But again when I reflected that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to injure anything human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects.
As night advanced I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my operations.
"As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore along like a mighty avalanche and produced a kind of insanity in my spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection.
I lighted the dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage, my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon nearly touched.
A part of its orb was at length hid, and I waved my brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath, and bushes, which I had collected.
The wind fanned the fire, and the cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.
"As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.
"And now, with the world before me, whither should I bend my steps?
I resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible.
At length the thought of you crossed my mind.
I learned from your papers that you were my father, my creator; and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who had given me life?
Among the lessons that Felix had bestowed upon Safie, geography had not been omitted; I had learned from these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
You had mentioned Geneva as the name of your native town, and towards this place I resolved to proceed.
"But how was I to direct myself?
I knew that I must travel in a southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my only guide.
I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass through, nor could I ask information from a single human being; but I did not despair.
From you only could I hope for succour, although towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred.
Unfeeling, heartless creator!
You had endowed me with perceptions and passions and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being that wore the human form.
"My travels were long and the sufferings I endured intense.
It was late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long resided.
I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human being.
Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter.
Oh, earth!
How often did I imprecate curses on the cause of my being!
The mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall and bitterness.
The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more deeply did I feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart.
Snow fell, and the waters were hardened, but I rested not.
A few incidents now and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path.
The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.
"I generally rested during the day and travelled only when I was secured by night from the view of man.
One morning, however, finding that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring, cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of the air.
I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me.
Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy.
Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.
"I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress.
I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running towards the spot where I was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from someone in sport.
She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the rapid stream.
I rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour, from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore.
She was senseless, and I endeavoured by every means in my power to restore animation, when I was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic, who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled.
On seeing me, he darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms, hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood.
I followed speedily, I hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun, which he carried, at my body and fired.
I sank to the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.
"This was then the reward of my benevolence!
I had saved a human being from destruction, and as a recompense I now writhed under the miserable pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone.
The feelings of kindness and gentleness which I had entertained but a few moments before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth.
Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind.
But the agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I fainted.
"For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to cure the wound which I had received.
The ball had entered my shoulder, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any rate I had no means of extracting it.
My sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their infliction.
My daily vows rose for revenge--a deep and deadly revenge, such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had endured.
"After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey.
The labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery which insulted my desolate state and made me feel more painfully that I was not made for the enjoyment of pleasure.
"But my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from this time I reached the environs of Geneva.
"It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place among the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I should apply to you.
I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of Jura.
"At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection, which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen, with all the sportiveness of infancy.
Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity.
If, therefore, I could seize him and educate him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desolate in this peopled earth.
"Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed and drew him towards me.
As soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; I drew his hand forcibly from his face and said, 'Child, what is the meaning of this?
I do not intend to hurt you; listen to me.'
"He struggled violently.
'Let me go,' he cried; 'monster!
Ugly wretch!
You wish to eat me and tear me to pieces.
You are an ogre.
Let me go, or I will tell my papa.'
"'Boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.'
"'Hideous monster!
Let me go.
My papa is a syndic--he is M. Frankenstein--he will punish you.
You dare not keep me.'
"'Frankenstein!
you belong then to my enemy--to him towards whom I have sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.'
"The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried despair to my heart; I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a moment he lay dead at my feet.
"I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed, 'I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.'
"As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his breast.
I took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman.
In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me.
For a few moments I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; I remembered that I was forever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could bestow and that she whose resemblance I contemplated would, in regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one expressive of disgust and affright.
"Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage?
I only wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them.
"While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot where I had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I entered a barn which had appeared to me to be empty.
A woman was sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the loveliness of youth and health.
Here, I thought, is one of those whose joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me.
And then I bent over her and whispered, 'Awake, fairest, thy lover is near--he who would give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my beloved, awake!'
"The sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me.
Should she indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer?
Thus would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
The thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me--not I, but she, shall suffer; the murder I have committed because I am forever robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone.
The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment!
Thanks to the lessons of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned now to work mischief.
I bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress.
She moved again, and I fled.
"For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and its miseries forever.
At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify.
We may not part until you have promised to comply with my requisition.
I am alone and miserable; man will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me.
My companion must be of the same species and have the same defects.
This being you must create."
Chapter 17
The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the expectation of a reply.
But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his proposition.
He continued,
"You must create a female for me with whom I can live in the interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being.
This you alone can do, and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to concede."
The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he said this I could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me.
"I do refuse it," I replied; "and no torture shall ever extort a consent from me.
You may render me the most miserable of men, but you shall never make me base in my own eyes.
Shall I create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world.
Begone!
I have answered you; you may torture me, but I will never consent."
"You are in the wrong," replied the fiend; "and instead of threatening, I am content to reason with you.
I am malicious because I am miserable.
Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind?
You, my creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I should pity man more than he pities me?
You would not call it murder if you could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the work of your own hands.
Shall I respect man when he condemns me?
Let him live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
But that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our union.
Yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery.
I will revenge my injuries; if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred.
Have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of your birth."
A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently he calmed himself and proceeded--
"I intended to reason.
This passion is detrimental to me, for you do not reflect that YOU are the cause of its excess.
If any being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creature's sake I would make peace with the whole kind!
But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realized.
What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate; I demand a creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it is all that I can receive, and it shall content me.
It is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more attached to one another.
Our lives will not be happy, but they will be harmless and free from the misery I now feel.
Oh!
My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit!
Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request!"
I was moved.
I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences of my consent, but I felt that there was some justice in his argument.
His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature of fine sensations, and did I not as his maker owe him all the portion of happiness that it was in my power to bestow?
He saw my change of feeling and continued,
"If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South America.
My food is not that of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment.
My companion will be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on man and will ripen our food.
The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the wantonness of power and cruelty.
Pitiless as you have been towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire."
"You propose," replied I, "to fly from the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your only companions.
How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile?
You will return and again seek their kindness, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
This may not be; cease to argue the point, for I cannot consent."
"How inconstant are your feelings!
But a moment ago you were moved by my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me, that with the companion you bestow I will quit the neighbourhood of man and dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places.
My evil passions will have fled, for I shall meet with sympathy!
My life will flow quietly away, and in my dying moments I shall not curse my maker."
His words had a strange effect upon me.
I compassionated him and sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when I looked upon him, when I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred.
I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that as I could not sympathize with him, I had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which was yet in my power to bestow.
"You swear," I said, "to be harmless; but have you not already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust you?
May not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by affording a wider scope for your revenge?"
"How is this?
I must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer.
If I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion; the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and I shall become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant.
My vices are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor, and my virtues will necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal.
I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of existence and events from which I am now excluded."
I paused some time to reflect on all he had related and the various arguments which he had employed.
I thought of the promise of virtues which he had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had manifested towards him.
His power and threats were not omitted in my calculations; a creature who could exist in the ice caves of the glaciers and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices was a being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with.
After a long pause of reflection I concluded that the justice due both to him and my fellow creatures demanded of me that I should comply with his request.
Turning to him, therefore, I said,
"I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe forever, and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I shall deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile."
"I swear," he cried, "by the sun, and by the blue sky of heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again.
Depart to your home and commence your labours; I shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready I shall appear."
Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my sentiments.
I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the sea of ice.
His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of the horizon when he departed.
I knew that I ought to hasten my descent towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my heart was heavy, and my steps slow.
The labour of winding among the little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences of the day had produced.
Night was far advanced when I came to the halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain.
The stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange thoughts within me.
I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, I exclaimed, "Oh!
Stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness."
These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me.
Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; I took no rest, but returned immediately to Geneva.
Even in my own heart I could give no expression to my sensations--they weighed on me with a mountain's weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the family.
My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I answered no question, scarcely did I speak.
I felt as if I were placed under a ban--as if I had no right to claim their sympathies--as if never more might I enjoy companionship with them.
Yet even thus I loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate myself to my most abhorred task.
The prospect of such an occupation made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream, and that thought only had to me the reality of life.
Chapter 18
Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva; and I could not collect the courage to recommence my work.
I feared the vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unable to overcome my repugnance to the task which was enjoined me.
I found that I could not compose a female without again devoting several months to profound study and laborious disquisition.
I had heard of some discoveries having been made by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father's consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to me.
A change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably.
My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy, which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine.
At these moments I took refuge in the most perfect solitude.
I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the rippling of the waves, silent and listless.
But the fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure, and on my return I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more cheerful heart.
It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me,
"I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself.
And yet you are still unhappy and still avoid our society.
For some time I was lost in conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me, and if it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it.
Reserve on such a point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all."
I trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued--"I confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years.
You were attached to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another.
But so blind is the experience of man that what I conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have entirely destroyed it.
You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any wish that she might become your wife.
Nay, you may have met with another whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to Elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear to feel."
"My dear father, reassure yourself.
I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely.
I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection.
My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation of our union."
"The expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear Victor, gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced.
If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us.
But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dissipate.
Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnization of the marriage.
We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities.
You are younger; yet I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and utility that you may have formed.
Do not suppose, however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness.
Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity."
I listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable of offering any reply.
I revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion.
Alas!
To me the idea of an immediate union with my Elizabeth was one of horror and dismay.
I was bound by a solemn promise which I had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I did, what manifold miseries might not impend over me and my devoted family!
Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the ground?
I must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with his mate before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from which I expected peace.
I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in my present undertaking.
The latter method of obtaining the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, I had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father's house while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved.
I knew that a thousand fearful accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected with me with horror.
I was aware also that I should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my unearthly occupation.
I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed.
Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be restored to my family in peace and happiness.
My promise fulfilled, the monster would depart forever.
Or (so my fond fancy imaged) some accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my slavery forever.
These feelings dictated my answer to my father.
I expressed a wish to visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to comply.
After so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find that I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey, and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my return, have restored me entirely to myself.
The duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few months, or at most a year, was the period contemplated.
One paternal kind precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion.
Without previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth, arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasbourg.
This interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be an impediment, and truly I rejoiced that thus I should be saved many hours of lonely, maddening reflection.
Nay, Henry might stand between me and the intrusion of my foe.
If I were alone, would he not at times force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of my task or to contemplate its progress?
To England, therefore, I was bound, and it was understood that my union with Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return.
My father's age rendered him extremely averse to delay.
For myself, there was one reward I promised myself from my detested toils--one consolation for my unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when, enfranchised from my miserable slavery, I might claim Elizabeth and forget the past in my union with her.
I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me which filled me with fear and agitation.
During my absence I should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my departure.
But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and would he not accompany me to England?
This imagination was dreadful in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
I was agonized with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of this might happen.
But through the whole period during which I was the slave of my creature I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations.
It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted my native country.
My journey had been my own suggestion, and Elizabeth therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief.
It had been her care which provided me a companion in Clerval--and yet a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman's sedulous attention.
She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell.
I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around.
I remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me.
Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving.
I could only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy me whilst they endured.
After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I traversed many leagues, I arrived at Strasbourg, where I waited two days for Clerval.
He came.
Alas, how great was the contrast between us!
He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauties of the setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new day.
He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky.
"This is what it is to live," he cried; "how I enjoy existence!
But you, my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful!"
In truth, I was occupied by gloomy thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine.
And you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections.
I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment.
We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasbourg to Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London.
During this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from Strasbourg, arrived at Mainz.
The course of the Rhine below Mainz becomes much more picturesque.
The river descends rapidly and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms.
We saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible.
This part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a singularly variegated landscape.
In one spot you view rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene.
We travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers as we glided down the stream.
Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased.
I lay at the bottom of the boat, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a stranger.
And if these were my sensations, who can describe those of Henry?
He felt as if he had been transported to fairy-land and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man.
"I have seen," he said, "the most beautiful scenes of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance were it not for the most verdant islands that believe the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind; I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders.
The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a charm in the banks of this divine river that I never before saw equalled.
Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the recess of the mountain.
Oh, surely the spirit that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of our own country."
Clerval!
Beloved friend!
Even now it delights me to record your words and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving.
He was a being formed in the "very poetry of nature."
His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart.
His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the world-minded teach us to look for only in the imagination.
But even human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind.
The scenery of external nature, which others regard only with admiration, he loved with ardour:--
----The sounding cataract      Haunted him like a passion:  the tall rock,      The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,      Their colours and their forms, were then to him      An appetite; a feeling, and a love,      That had no need of a remoter charm,      By thought supplied, or any interest      Unborrow'd from the eye.
[Wordsworth's "Tintern Abbey".]
And where does he now exist?
Is this gentle and lovely being lost forever?
Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the life of its creator;--has this mind perished?
Does it now only exist in my memory?
No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend.
Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates.
I will proceed with my tale.
Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland; and we resolved to post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of the river was too gentle to aid us.
Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we arrived in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England.
It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of December, that I first saw the white cliffs of Britain.
The banks of the Thames presented a new scene; they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the remembrance of some story.
We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich--places which I had heard of even in my country.
At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul's towering above all, and the Tower famed in English history.
Chapter 19
London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated city.
Clerval desired the intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this time, but this was with me a secondary object; I was principally occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of introduction that I had brought with me, addressed to the most distinguished natural philosophers.
If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness, it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure.
But a blight had come over my existence, and I only visited these people for the sake of the information they might give me on the subject in which my interest was so terribly profound.
Company was irksome to me; when alone, I could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of Henry soothed me, and I could thus cheat myself into a transitory peace.
But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to my heart.
I saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of William and Justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish.
But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive and anxious to gain experience and instruction.
The difference of manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement.
He was also pursuing an object he had long had in view.
His design was to visit India, in the belief that he had in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views he had taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of European colonization and trade.
In Britain only could he further the execution of his plan.
He was forever busy, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind.
I tried to conceal this as much as possible, that I might not debar him from the pleasures natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection.
I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might remain alone.
I now also began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this was to me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling on the head.
Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme anguish, and every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.
After passing some months in London, we received a letter from a person in Scotland who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva.
He mentioned the beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as Perth, where he resided.
Clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.
We had arrived in England at the beginning of October, and it was now February.
We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month.
In this expedition we did not intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of July.
I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland.
We quitted London on the 27th of March and remained a few days at Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest.
This was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us.
From thence we proceeded to Oxford.
As we entered this city our minds were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted there more than a century and a half before.
It was here that Charles I. had collected his forces.
This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of Parliament and liberty.
The memory of that unfortunate king and his companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city which they might be supposed to have inhabited.
The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps.
If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
The colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost magnificent; and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it through meadows of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters, which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and domes, embosomed among aged trees.
I enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the memory of the past and the anticipation of the future.
I was formed for peaceful happiness.
During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and if I was ever overcome by ennui, the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate elasticity to my spirits.
But I am a blasted tree; the bolt has entered my soul; and I felt then that I should survive to exhibit what I shall soon cease to be--a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.
We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most animating epoch of English history.
Our little voyages of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented themselves.
We visited the tomb of the illustrious Hampden and the field on which that patriot fell.
For a moment my soul was elevated from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and self sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments and the remembrancers.
For an instant I dared to shake off my chains and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten into my flesh, and I sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self.
We left Oxford with regret and proceeded to Matlock, which was our next place of rest.
The country in the neighbourhood of this village resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland; but everything is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of distant white Alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my native country.
We visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same manner as in the collections at Servox and Chamounix.
The latter name made me tremble when pronounced by Henry, and I hastened to quit Matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.
From Derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in Cumberland and Westmorland.
I could now almost fancy myself among the Swiss mountains.
The little patches of snow which yet lingered on the northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me.
Here also we made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness.
The delight of Clerval was proportionably greater than mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and he found in his own nature greater capacities and resources than he could have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his inferiors.
"I could pass my life here," said he to me; "and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine."
But he found that a traveller's life is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments.
His feelings are forever on the stretch; and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties.
We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmorland and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them to travel on.
For my own part I was not sorry.
I had now neglected my promise for some time, and I feared the effects of the daemon's disappointment.
He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives.
This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace.
I waited for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed I was miserable and overcome by a thousand fears; and when they arrived and I saw the superscription of Elizabeth or my father, I hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate.
Sometimes I thought that the fiend followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit Henry for a moment, but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of his destroyer.
I felt as if I had committed some great crime, the consciousness of which haunted me.
I was guiltless, but I had indeed drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.
I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being.
Clerval did not like it so well as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, Arthur's Seat, St. Bernard's Well, and the Pentland Hills compensated him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration.
But I was impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.
We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew's, and along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us.
But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and accordingly I told Clerval that I wished to make the tour of Scotland alone.
"Do you," said I, "enjoy yourself, and let this be our rendezvous.
I may be absent a month or two; but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and solitude for a short time; and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more congenial to your own temper."
Henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to remonstrate.
He entreated me to write often.
"I had rather be with you," he said, "in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch people, whom I do not know; hasten, then, my dear  friend, to return, that I may again feel myself somewhat at home, which I cannot do in your absence."
Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit some remote spot of Scotland and finish my work in solitude.
I did not doubt but that the monster followed me and would discover himself to me when I should have finished, that he might receive his companion.
With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene of my labours.
It was a place fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves.
The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare.
Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from the mainland, which was about five miles distant.
On the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of these was vacant when I arrived.
This I hired.
It contained but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable penury.
The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the door was off its hinges.
I ordered it to be repaired, bought some furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty.
As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men.
In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of the sea to listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet.
It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene.
I thought of Switzerland; it was far different from this desolate and appalling landscape.
Its hills are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the plains.
Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.
In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first arrived, but as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me.
Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days, and at other times I toiled day and night in order to complete my work.
It was, indeed, a filthy process in which I was engaged.
During my first experiment, a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my employment; my mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings.
But now I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.
Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from the actual scene in which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I grew restless and nervous.
Every moment I feared to meet my persecutor.
Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so much dreaded to behold.
I feared to wander from the sight of my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion.
In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced.
I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom.
Chapter 20
I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just rising from the sea; I had not sufficient light for my employment, and I remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether I should leave my labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it.
As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of what I was now doing.
Three years before, I was engaged in the same manner and had created a fiend whose unparalleled barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it forever with the bitterest remorse.
I was now about to form another being of whose dispositions I was alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness.
He had sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she had not; and she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with a compact made before her creation.
They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence for it when it came before his eyes in the female form?
She also might turn with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him, and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being deserted by one of his own species.
Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world, yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the daemon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a condition precarious and full of terror.
Had I right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations?
I had before been moved by the sophisms of the being I had created; I had been struck senseless by his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my promise burst upon me; I shuddered to think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.
I trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, I saw by the light of the moon the daemon at the casement.
A ghastly grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which he had allotted to me.
Yes, he had followed me in my travels; he had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise.
As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery.
I thought with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged.
The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.
I left the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, I sought my own apartment.
I was alone; none were near me to dissipate the gloom and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most terrible reveries.
Several hours passed, and I remained near my window gazing on the sea; it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature reposed under the eye of the quiet moon.
A few fishing vessels alone specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another.
I felt the silence, although I was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a person landed close to my house.
In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door, as if some one endeavoured to open it softly.
I trembled from head to foot; I felt a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.
Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared.
Shutting the door, he approached me and said in a smothered voice, "You have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you intend?
Do you dare to break your promise?
I have endured toil and misery; I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of the Rhine, among its willow islands and over the summits of its hills.
I have dwelt many months in the heaths of England and among the deserts of Scotland.
I have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my hopes?"
"Begone!
I do break my promise; never will I create another like yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness."
"Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself unworthy of my condescension.
Remember that I have power; you believe yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of day will be hateful to you.
You are my creator, but I am your master; obey!"
"The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is arrived.
Your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in vice.
Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a daemon whose delight is in death and wretchedness?
Begone!
I am firm, and your words will only exasperate my rage."
The monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the impotence of anger.
"Shall each man," cried he, "find a wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone?
I had feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
Man!
You may hate, but beware!
Your hours will pass in dread and misery, and soon the bolt  will fall which must ravish from you your happiness forever.
Are you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness?
You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains--revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food!
I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your misery.
Beware, for I am fearless and therefore powerful.
I will watch with the wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom.
Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict."
"Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no coward to bend beneath words.
Leave me; I am inexorable."
"It is well.
I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your wedding-night."
I started forward and exclaimed, "Villain!
Before you sign my death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe."
I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with precipitation.
In a few moments I saw him in his boat, which shot across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the waves.
All was again silent, but his words rang in my ears.
I burned with rage to pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean.
I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me.
Why had I not followed him and closed with him in mortal strife?
But I had suffered him to depart, and he had directed his course towards the mainland.
I shuddered to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
And then I thought again of his words--"I WILL BE WITH YOU ON YOUR WEDDING-NIGHT."
That, then, was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my destiny.
In that hour I should die and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice.
The prospect did not move me to fear; yet when I thought of my beloved Elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first I had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to fall before my enemy without a bitter struggle.
The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into the depths of despair.
I left the house, the horrid scene of the last night's contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me.
I desired that I might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery.
If I returned, it was to be sacrificed or to see those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a daemon whom I had myself created.
I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it loved and miserable in the separation.
When it became noon, and the sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep sleep.
I had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery.
The sleep into which I now sank refreshed me; and when I awoke, I again felt as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.
The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to join him.
He said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed in London desired his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his Indian enterprise.
He could not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I could spare.
He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together.
This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.
Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on which I shuddered to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose I must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and I must handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me.
The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door of my laboratory.
The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had mangled the living flesh of a human being.
I paused to collect myself and then entered the chamber.
With trembling hand I conveyed the instruments out of the room, but I reflected that I ought not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the meantime I sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.
Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the daemon.
I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if a film had been taken from before my eyes and that I for the first time saw clearly.
The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it.
I had resolved in my own mind that to create another like the fiend I had first made would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and I banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different conclusion.
Between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but I sailed away from them.
I felt as if I was about the commission of a dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my fellow creatures.
At one time the moon, which had before been clear, was suddenly overspread by a thick cloud, and I took advantage of the moment of darkness and cast my basket into the sea; I listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from the spot.
The sky became clouded, but the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising.
But it refreshed me and filled me with such agreeable sensations that I resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat.
Clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and I heard only the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a short time I slept soundly.
I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but when I awoke I found that the sun had already mounted considerably.
The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff.
I found that the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the coast from which I had embarked.
I endeavoured to change my course but quickly found that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water.
Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind.
I confess that I felt a few sensations of terror.
I had no compass with me and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the world that the sun was of little benefit to me.
I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me.
I had already been out many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings.
I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; I looked upon the sea; it was to be my grave.
"Fiend," I exclaimed, "your task is already fulfilled!"
I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, and of Clerval--all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions.
This idea plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of closing before me forever, I shudder to reflect on it.
Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers.
But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a line of high land towards the south.
Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.
How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the excess of misery!
I constructed another sail with a part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land.
It had a wild and rocky appearance, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived the traces of cultivation.
I saw vessels near the shore and found myself suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilized man.
I carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing from behind a small promontory.
As I was in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I could most easily procure nourishment.
Fortunately I had money with me.
As I turned the promontory I perceived a small neat town and a good harbour, which I entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected escape.
As I was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several people crowded towards the spot.
They seemed much surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me a slight sensation of alarm.
As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language.
"My good friends," said I, "will you be so kind as to tell me the name of this town and inform me where I am?"
"You will know that soon enough," replied a man with a hoarse voice.
"Maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste, but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you."
I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a stranger, and I was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and angry countenances of his companions.
"Why do you answer me so roughly?"
I replied.
"Surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably."
"I do not know," said the man, "what the custom of the English may be, but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains."
While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd rapidly increase.
Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger, which annoyed  and in some degree alarmed me.
I inquired the way to the inn, but no one replied.
I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man approaching tapped me on the shoulder and said, "Come, sir, you must follow me to Mr. Kirwin's to give an account of yourself."
"Who is Mr. Kirwin?
Why am I to give an account of myself?
Is not this a free country?"
"Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks.
Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night."
This answer startled me, but I presently recovered myself.
I was innocent; that could easily be proved; accordingly I followed my conductor in silence and was led to one of the best houses in the town.
I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd, I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt.
Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a few moments to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair all fear of ignominy or death.
I must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to my recollection.
Chapter 21
I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners.
He looked upon me, however, with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors, he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.
About half a dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the magistrate, he deposed that he had been out fishing the night before with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, about ten o'clock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in for port.
It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about two miles below.
He walked on first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance.
As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground.
His companions came up to assist him, and by the light of their lantern they found that he had fallen on the body of a man, who was to all appearance dead.
Their first supposition was that it was the corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even that the body was not then cold.
They instantly carried it to the cottage of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it to life.
It appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age.
He had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.
The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support.
The magistrate observed me with a keen eye and of course drew an unfavourable augury from my manner.
The son confirmed his father's account, but when Daniel Nugent was called he swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore; and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same boat in which I had just landed.
A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse was afterwards found.
Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not cold.
They put it into a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone.
Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it was very probable that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which I had departed.
Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought the body from another place, and it was likely that as I did not appear to know the shore, I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance of the town of ---- from the place where I had deposited the corpse.
Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be taken into the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what effect the sight of it would produce upon me.
This idea was probably suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the mode of the murder had been described.
I was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn.
I could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but, knowing that I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that the body had been found, I was perfectly tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.
I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin.
How can I describe my sensations on beholding it?
I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and agony.
The examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory when I saw the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me.
I gasped for breath, and throwing myself on the body, I exclaimed, "Have my murderous machinations deprived you also, my dearest Henry, of life?
Two I have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor--"
The human frame could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.
A fever succeeded to this.
I lay for two months on the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clerval.
Sometimes I entreated my attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was tormented; and at others I felt the fingers of the monster already grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror.
Fortunately, as I spoke my native language, Mr. Kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.
Why did I not die?
More miserable than man ever was before, why did I not sink into forgetfulness and rest?
Death snatches away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb!
Of what materials was I made that I could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture?
But I was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by jailers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon.
It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding; I had forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I looked around and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which I was, all flashed across my memory and I groaned bitterly.
This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside me.
She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterize that class.
The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathizing in sights of misery.
Her tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one that I had heard during my sufferings.
"Are you better now, sir?"
said she.
I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, "I believe I am; but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry that I am still alive to feel this misery and horror."
"For that matter," replied the old woman, "if you mean about the gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you!
However, that's none of my business; I am sent to nurse you and get you well; I do my duty with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same."
I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed.
The whole series of my life appeared to me as a dream; I sometimes doubted if indeed it were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force of reality.
As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me.
The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the second.
Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the hangman who would gain his fee?
These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness.
He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who had provided a physician and a nurse.
It is true, he seldom came to see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies and miserable ravings of a murderer.
He came, therefore, sometimes to see that I was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long intervals.
One day, while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my cheeks livid like those in death.
I was overcome by gloom and misery and often reflected I had better seek death than desire to remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness.
At one time I considered whether I should not declare myself guilty and suffer the penalty of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been.
Such were my thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered.
His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in French, "I fear that this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you more comfortable?"
"I thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving."
"I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune.
But you will, I hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge."
"That is my least concern; I am, by a course of strange events, become the most miserable of mortals.
Persecuted and tortured as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?"
"Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonizing than the strange chances that have lately occurred.
You were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder.
The first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across your path."
As Mr. Kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation I endured on this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise at the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me.
I suppose some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for Mr. Kirwin hastened to say, "Immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on your person were brought me, and I examined them that I might discover some trace by which I could send to your relations an account of your misfortune and illness.
I found several letters, and, among others, one which I discovered from its commencement to be from your father.
I instantly wrote to Geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.
But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind."
"This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event; tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder I am now to lament?"
"Your family is perfectly well," said Mr. Kirwin with gentleness; "and someone, a friend, is come to visit you."
I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the death of Clerval, as a new incitement for me to comply with his hellish desires.
I put my hand before my eyes, and cried out in agony, "Oh!
Take him away!
I cannot see him; for God's sake, do not let him enter!"
Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance.
He could not help regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in rather a severe tone, "I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance."
"My father!"
cried I, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed from anguish to pleasure.
"Is my father indeed come?
How kind, how very kind!
But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?"
My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium, and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence.
He rose and quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.
Nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than the arrival of my father.
I stretched out my hand to him and cried, "Are you, then, safe--and Elizabeth--and Ernest?"
My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness.
"What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!"
said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room.
"You travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems to pursue you.
And poor Clerval--"
The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears.
"Alas!
Yes, my father," replied I; "some destiny of the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I should have died on the coffin of Henry."
We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity.
Mr. Kirwin came in and insisted that my strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion.
But the appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health.
As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate.
The image of Clerval was forever before me, ghastly and murdered.
More than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse.
Alas!
Why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life?
It was surely that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a close.
Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also sink to rest.
Then the appearance of death was distant, although the wish was ever present to my thoughts; and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.
The season of the assizes approached.
I had already been three months in prison, and although I was still weak and in continual danger of a relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the country town where the court was held.
Mr. Kirwin charged himself with every care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence.
I was spared the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not brought before the court that decides on life and death.
The grand jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that I was on the Orkney Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fortnight after my removal I was liberated from prison.
My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country.
I did not participate in these feelings, for to me the walls of a dungeon or a palace were alike hateful.
The cup of life was poisoned forever, and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me.
Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as I first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.
My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection.
He talked of Geneva, which I should soon visit, of Elizabeth and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me.
Sometimes, indeed, I felt a wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring maladie du pays, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and despair.
At these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to the existence I loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence.
Yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally triumphed over my selfish despair.
It was necessary that I should return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over the lives of those I so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any chance led me to the place of his concealment, or if he dared again to blast me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to the existence of the monstrous image which  I had endued with the mockery of a soul still more monstrous.
My father still desired to delay our departure, fearful that I could not sustain the fatigues of a journey, for I was a shattered wreck--the shadow of a human being.
My strength was gone.
I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame.
Still, as I urged our leaving Ireland with such inquietude and impatience, my father thought it best to yield.
We took our passage on board a vessel bound for Havre-de-Grace and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores.
It was midnight.
I lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to the dashing of the waves.
I hailed the darkness that shut Ireland from my sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when I reflected that I should soon see Geneva.
The past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream; yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me told me too forcibly that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation.
I repassed, in my memory, my whole life--my quiet happiness while residing with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for Ingolstadt.
I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called to mind the night in which he first lived.
I was unable to pursue the train of thought; a thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly.
Ever since my recovery from the fever I had been in the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug only that I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of life.
Oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, I now swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly.
But sleep did not afford me respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a thousand objects that scared me.
Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of nightmare; I felt the fiend's grasp in my neck and could not free myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears.
My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a kind of calm forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly susceptible.
Chapter 22
The voyage came to an end.
We landed, and proceeded to Paris.
I soon found that I had overtaxed my strength and that I must repose before I could continue my journey.
My father's care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill.
He wished me to seek amusement in society.
I abhorred the face of man.
Oh, not abhorred!
They were my brethren, my fellow beings, and I felt attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an angelic nature and celestial mechanism.
But I felt that I had no right to share their intercourse.
I had unchained an enemy among them whose joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans.
How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!
My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair.
Sometimes he thought that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and he endeavoured to prove to me the futility of pride.
"Alas!
My father," said I, "how little do you know me.
Human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I felt pride.
Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am the cause of this--I murdered her.
William, Justine, and Henry--they all died by my hands."
My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I preserved in my convalescence.
I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had created.
I had a persuasion that I should be supposed mad, and this in itself would forever have chained my tongue.
But, besides, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of his breast.
I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent when I would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret.
Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me.
I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.
Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, "My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this?
My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion again."
"I am not mad," I cried energetically; "the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth.
I am the assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations.
A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could not, my father, indeed I could not sacrifice the whole human race."
The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts.
He wished as much as possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes.
As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my heart, but I no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them.
By the utmost self-violence I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey to the sea of ice.
A few days before we left Paris on our way to Switzerland, I received the following letter from Elizabeth:
"My dear Friend,
"It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle dated at Paris; you are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight.
My poor cousin, how much you must have suffered!
I expect to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva.
This winter has been passed most miserably, tortured as I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity.
"Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time.
I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had with my uncle previous to his departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet.
Explanation!
You may possibly say, What can Elizabeth have to explain?
If you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
But you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet be pleased with this explanation; and in a probability of this being the case, I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.
"You well know, Victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of your parents ever since our infancy.
We were told this when young, and taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place.
We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older.
But as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each other without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our case?
Tell me, dearest Victor.
Answer me, I conjure you by our mutual happiness, with simple truth--Do you not love another?
"You have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every creature, I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
But this is false reasoning.
I confess to you, my friend, that I love you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant friend and companion.
But it is your happiness I desire as well as my own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice.
Even now I weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word 'honour,' all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself.
I, who have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes.
Ah!
Victor, be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be made miserable by this supposition.
Be happy, my friend; and if you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.
"Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain.
My uncle will send me news of your health, and if I see but one smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, I shall need no other happiness.
"Elizabeth Lavenza
"Geneva, May 18th, 17--"
This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, the threat of the fiend--"I WILL BE WITH YOU ON YOUR WEDDING-NIGHT!"
Such was my sentence, and on that night would the daemon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings.
On that night he had determined to consummate his crimes by my death.
Well, be it so; a deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if he were victorious I should be at peace and his power over me be at an end.
If he were vanquished, I should be a free man.
Alas!
What freedom?
Such as the peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, penniless, and alone, but free.
Such would be my liberty except that in my Elizabeth I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.
Sweet and beloved Elizabeth!
I read and reread her letter, and some softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the angel's arm bared to drive me from all hope.
Yet I would die to make her happy.
If the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet, again, I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate.
My destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner, but if my torturer should suspect that I postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge.
He had vowed TO BE WITH ME ON MY WEDDING-NIGHT, yet he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats.
I resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father's happiness, my adversary's designs against my life should not retard it a single hour.
In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth.
My letter was calm and affectionate.
"I fear, my beloved girl," I said, "little happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day enjoy is centred in you.
Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment.
I have one secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only wonder that I survive what I have endured.
I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place, for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us.
But until then, I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it.
This I most earnestly entreat, and I know you will comply."
In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth's letter we returned to Geneva.
The sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish  cheeks.
I saw a change in her also.
She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I was.
The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure.
Memory brought madness with it, and when I thought of what had passed, a real insanity possessed me; sometimes I was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and despondent.
I neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.
Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice would soothe me when transported by passion and inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor.
She wept with me and for me.
When reason returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with resignation.
Ah!
It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no peace.
The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.
Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with Elizabeth.
I remained silent.
"Have you, then, some other attachment?"
"None on earth.
I love Elizabeth and look forward to our union with delight.
Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin."
"My dear Victor, do not speak thus.
Heavy misfortunes have befallen us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet live.
Our circle will be small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune.
And when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived."
Such were the lessons of my father.
But to me the remembrance of the threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had yet been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words "I SHALL BE WITH YOU ON YOUR WEDDING-NIGHT," I should regard the threatened fate as unavoidable.
But death was no evil to me if the loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it, and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate.
Great God!
If for one instant I had thought what might be the hellish intention of my fiendish adversary, I would rather have banished myself forever from my native country and wandered a friendless outcast over the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage.
But, as if possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real intentions; and when I thought that I had prepared only my own death, I hastened that of a far dearer victim.
As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me.
But I concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth.
She looked forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.
Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance.
I shut up, as well as I could, in my own heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy.
Through my father's exertions a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government.
A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her.
It was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood.
In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me.
I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity.
Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed for its solemnization drew nearer and I heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent.
Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to calm her mind.
But on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which I had promised to reveal to her on the following day.
My father was in the meantime overjoyed and in the bustle of preparation only recognized in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.
After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my father's, but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day.
The day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.
Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness.
We passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw Mont Saleve, the pleasant banks of Montalegre, and at a distance, surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blanc and the assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.
I took the hand of Elizabeth.
"You are sorrowful, my love.
Ah!
If you knew what I have suffered and what I may yet endure, you would endeavour to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy."
"Be happy, my dear Victor," replied Elizabeth; "there is, I hope, nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, my heart is contented.
Something whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will not listen to such a sinister voice.
Observe how fast we move along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interesting.
Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom.
What a divine day!
How happy and serene all nature appears!"
Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects.
But her temper was fluctuating; joy for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place to distraction and reverie.
The sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills.
The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary.
The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.
The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity, sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and hay.
The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I touched the shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me forever.
Chapter 23
It was eight o'clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.
The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west.
The moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that were beginning to rise.
Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.
I had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind.
I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; every sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that of my adversary was extinguished.
Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence, but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and trembling, she asked, "What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor?
What is it you fear?"
"Oh!
Peace, peace, my love," replied I; "this night, and all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful."
I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.
She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary.
But I discovered no trace of him and was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his menaces when suddenly I heard a shrill and dreadful scream.
It came from the room into which Elizabeth had retired.
As I heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs.
This state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed into the room.
Great God!
Why did I not then expire!
Why am I here to relate the destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth?
She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair.
Everywhere I turn I see the same figure--her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung by the murderer on its bridal bier.
Could I behold this and live?
Alas!
Life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated.
For a moment only did I lose recollection; I fell senseless on the ground.
When I recovered I found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their countenances expressed a breathless terror, but the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me.
I escaped from them to the room where lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy.
She had been moved from the posture in which I had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have supposed her asleep.
I rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what I now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and cherished.
The murderous mark of the fiend's grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue from her lips.
While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened to look up.
The windows of the room had before been darkened, and I felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
The shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation of horror not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred.
A grin was on the face of the monster; he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife.
I rushed towards the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the lake.
The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room.
I pointed to the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats; nets were cast, but in vain.
After passing several hours, we returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a form conjured up by my fancy.
After having landed, they proceeded to search the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and vines.
I attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short distance from the house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a drunken man, I fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever.
In this state I was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that I had lost.
After an interval I arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room where the corpse of my beloved lay.
There were women weeping around; I hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause.
I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror.
The death of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet.
This idea made me shudder and recalled me to action.
I started up and resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.
There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the lake; but the wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents.
However, it was hardly morning, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night.
I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise.
But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion.
I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to every gloomy idea that arose.
If I looked up, I saw scenes which were familiar to me in my happier time and which I had contemplated but the day before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection.
Tears streamed from my eyes.
The rain had ceased for a moment, and I saw the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before; they had then been observed by Elizabeth.
Nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change.
The sun might shine or the clouds might lower, but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before.
A fiend had snatched from me every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been so miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history of man.
But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event?
Mine has been a tale of horrors; I have reached their acme, and what I must now relate can but be tedious to you.
Know that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; I was left desolate.
My own strength is exhausted, and I must tell, in a few words, what remains of my hideous narration.
I arrived at Geneva.
My father and Ernest yet lived, but the former sunk under the tidings that I bore.
I see him now, excellent and venerable old man!
His eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their delight--his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, having few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain.
Cursed, cursed be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste in wretchedness!
He could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.
What then became of me?
I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me.
Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but I awoke and found myself in a dungeon.
Melancholy followed, but by degrees I gained a clear conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my prison.
For they had called me mad, and during many months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.
Liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge.
As the memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, I began to reflect on their cause--the monster whom I had created, the miserable daemon whom I had sent abroad into the world for my destruction.
I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head.
Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town and told him that I had an accusation to make, that I knew the destroyer of my family, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer.
The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness.
"Be assured, sir," said he, "no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the villain."
"I thank you," replied I; "listen, therefore, to the deposition that I have to make.
It is indeed a tale so strange that I should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth which, however wonderful, forces conviction.
The story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood."
My manner as I thus addressed him was impressive but calm; I had formed in my own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled me to life.
I now related my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.
The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him sometimes shudder with horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance.
When I had concluded my narration I said, "This is the being whom I accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power.
It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion."
This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own auditor.
He had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned.
He, however, answered mildly, "I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance.
Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens where no man would venture to intrude?
Besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered or what region he may now inhabit."
"I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit, and if he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like the chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey.
But I perceive your thoughts; you do not credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the punishment which is his desert."
As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated.
"You are mistaken," said he.
"I will exert myself, and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes.
But I fear, from what you have yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment."
"That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail.
My revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul.
My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists.
You refuse my just demand; I have but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life or death, to his destruction."
I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there was a frenzy in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of that haughty fierceness which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed.
But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of madness.
He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child and reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.
"Man," I cried, "how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom!
Cease; you know not what it is you say."
I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some other mode of action.
Chapter 24
My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost.
I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been my portion.
My first resolution was to quit Geneva forever; my country, which, when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became hateful.
I provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed.
And now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life.
I have traversed a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet.
How I have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death.
But revenge kept me alive; I dared not die and leave my adversary in being.
When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy.
But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue.
As night approached I found myself at the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father reposed.
I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves.
Everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer.
The spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the mourner.
The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to rage and despair.
They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence.
I knelt on the grass and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, "By the sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night, and the spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the daemon who caused this misery, until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict.
For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes forever.
And I call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work.
Let the cursed and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now torments me."
I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies possessed me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance.
I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish laugh.
It rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
Surely in that moment I should have been possessed by frenzy and have destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that I was reserved for vengeance.
The laughter died away, when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in an audible whisper, "I am satisfied, miserable wretch!
You have determined to live, and I am satisfied."
I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp.
Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed.
I pursued him, and for many months this has been my task.
Guided by a slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly.
The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the fiend enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea.
I took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how.
Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I have ever followed in his track.
Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, who feared that if I lost all trace of him I should despair and die, left some mark to guide me.
The snows descended on my head, and I saw the print of his huge step on the white plain.
To you first entering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand what I have felt and still feel?
Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined to endure; I was cursed by some devil and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my steps and when I most murmured would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties.
Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited me.
The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but I will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I had invoked to aid me.
Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and vanish.
I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the daemon generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the country chiefly collected.
In other places human beings were seldom seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my path.
I had money with me and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had killed, which, after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.
My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during sleep alone that I could taste joy.
O blessed sleep!
Often, when most miserable, I sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture.
The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of happiness that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage.
Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships.
During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep I saw my friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth's voice, and beheld Clerval enjoying health and youth.
Often, when wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was dreaming until night should come and that I should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends.
What agonizing fondness did I feel for them!
How did I cling to their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and persuade myself that they still lived!
At such moments vengeance, that burned within me, died in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the daemon more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was unconscious, than as the ardent desire of my soul.
What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know.
Sometimes, indeed, he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my fury.
"My reign is not yet over"--these words were legible in one of these inscriptions--"you live, and my power is complete.
Follow me; I seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of cold and frost, to which I am impassive.
You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed.
Come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period shall arrive."
Scoffing devil!
Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death.
Never will I give up my search until he or I perish; and then with what ecstasy shall I join my Elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!
As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support.
The peasants were shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey.
The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.
The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours.
One inscription that he left was in these words:  "Prepare!
Your toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred."
My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon.
Oh!
How unlike it was to the blue seasons of the south!
Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness.
The Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with rapture the boundary of their toils.
I did not weep, but I knelt down and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary's gibe, to meet and grapple with him.
Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs and thus traversed the snows with inconceivable speed.
I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that, as before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so that when I first saw the ocean he was but one day's journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach.
With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore.
I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information.
A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance.
He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the ice or frozen by the eternal  frosts.
On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair.
He had escaped me, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive.
Yet at the idea that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey.
I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the frozen ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I departed from land.
I cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but I have endured misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution burning within my heart could have enabled me to support.
Immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often heard the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction.
But again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.
By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I should guess that I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of despondency and grief from my eyes.
Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery.
Once, after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain.
I strained my sight to discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within.
Oh!
With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might not intercept the view I had of the daemon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud.
But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an hour's rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, I continued my route.
The sledge was still visible, nor did I again lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags.
I indeed perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days' journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within me.
But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him more utterly than I had ever done before.
A ground sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous and terrific.
I pressed on, but in vain.
The wind arose; the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound.
The work was soon finished; in a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and thus preparing for me a hideous death.
In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw your vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life.
I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded at the sight.
I quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in the direction of your ship.
I had determined, if you were going southwards, still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose.
I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which I could pursue my enemy.
But your direction was northwards.
You took me on board when my vigour was exhausted, and I should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled.
Oh!
When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the daemon, allow me the rest I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live?
If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him and satisfy my vengeance in his death.
And do I dare to ask of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that I have undergone?
No; I am not so selfish.
Yet, when I am dead, if he should appear, if the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he shall not live--swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes.
He is eloquent and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but trust him not.
His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery and fiend-like malice.
Hear him not; call on the names of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched Victor, and thrust your sword into his heart.
I will hover near and direct the steel aright.
Walton, in continuation.
August 26th, 17--
You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles mine?
Sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish.
His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness.
Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression of the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.
His tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected.
Such a monster has, then, really existence!
I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration.
Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature's formation, but on this point he was impenetrable.
"Are you mad, my friend?"
said he.
"Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you?
Would you also create for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy?
Peace, peace!
Learn my miseries and do not seek to increase your own."
Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning his history; he asked to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places, but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy.
"Since you have preserved my narration," said he, "I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity."
Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the strangest tale that ever imagination formed.
My thoughts and every feeling of my soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale and his own elevated and gentle manners have created.
I wish to soothe him, yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every hope of consolation, to live?
Oh, no!
The only joy that he can now know will be when he composes his shattered spirit to peace and death.
Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and delirium; he believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a remote world.
This faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that render them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth.
Our conversations are not always confined to his own history and misfortunes.
On every point of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension.
His eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears.
What a glorious creature must he have been in the days of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin!
He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.
"When younger," said he, "I believed myself destined for some great enterprise.
My feelings are profound, but I possessed a  coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements.
This sentiment of the worth of my nature supported me when others would have been oppressed, for I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that might be useful to my fellow creatures.
When I reflected on the work I had completed, no less a one than the creation of a sensitive and rational animal, I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors.
But this thought, which supported me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust.
All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell.
My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man.
Even now I cannot recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete.
I trod heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea of their effects.
From my infancy I was imbued with high hopes and a lofty ambition; but how am I sunk!
Oh!
My friend, if you had known me as I once was, you would not recognize me in this state of degradation.
Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise."
Must I then lose this admirable being?
I have longed for a friend; I have sought one who would sympathize with and love me.
Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I fear I have gained him only to know his value and lose him.
I would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the idea.
"I thank you, Walton," he said, "for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone?
Can any man be to me as Clerval was, or any woman another Elizabeth?
Even where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence, the companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our minds which hardly any later friend can obtain.
They know our infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified, are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives.
A sister or a brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early, suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be contemplated with suspicion.
But I enjoyed friends, dear not only through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever I am, the soothing voice of my Elizabeth and the conversation of Clerval will be ever whispered in my ear.
They are dead, and but one feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life.
If I were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow creatures, then could I live to fulfil it.
But such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the being to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die."
September 2nd
My beloved Sister,
I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it.
I am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no escape and threaten every moment to crush my vessel.
The brave fellows whom I have persuaded to be my companions look towards me for aid, but I have none to bestow.
There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me.
Yet it is terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered through me.
If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.
And what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind?
You will not hear of my destruction, and you will anxiously await my return.
Years will pass, and you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope.
Oh!
My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death.
But you have a husband and lovely children; you may be happy.
Heaven bless you and make you so!
My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion.
He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued.
He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries.
Even the sailors feel the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the resolutions of man.
These feelings are transitory; each day of expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair.
September 5th
A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it.
We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict.
The cold is excessive, and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of desolation.
Frankenstein has daily declined in health; a feverish fire still glimmers in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness.
I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny.
This morning, as I sat watching the wan countenance of my friend--his eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlessly--I was roused by half a dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin.
They entered, and their leader addressed me.
He told me that he and his companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation to me to make me a requisition which, in justice, I could not refuse.
We were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened, I should be rash enough to continue my voyage and lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted this.
They insisted, therefore, that I should engage with a solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed I would instantly direct my course southwards.
This speech troubled me.
I had not despaired, nor had I yet conceived the idea of returning if set free.
Yet could I, in justice, or even in possibility, refuse this demand?
I hesitated before I answered, when Frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour.
Turning towards the men, he said, "What do you mean?
What do you demand of your captain?
Are you, then, so easily turned from your design?
Did you not call this a glorious expedition?
"And wherefore was it glorious?
Not because the way was smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and these you were to brave and overcome.
For this was it a glorious, for this was it an honourable undertaking.
You were hereafter to be hailed as the benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind.
And now, behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm firesides.
Why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat merely to prove yourselves cowards.
Oh!
Be men, or be more than men.
Be steady to your purposes and firm as a rock.
This ice is not made of such stuff as your hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it shall not.
Do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows.
Return as heroes who have fought and conquered and who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe."
He spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can you wonder that these men were moved?
They looked at one another and were unable to reply.
I spoke; I told them to retire and consider of what had been said, that I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary, but that I hoped that, with reflection, their courage would return.
They retired and I turned towards my friend, but he was sunk in languor and almost deprived of life.
How all this will terminate, I know not, but I had rather die than return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled.
Yet I fear such will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships.
September 7th
The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed.
It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience.
September 12th
It is past; I am returning to England.
I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost my friend.
But I will endeavour to detail these bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while I am wafted towards England and towards you, I will not despond.
September 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard at a distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction.
We were in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in such a degree that he was entirely confined to his bed.
The ice cracked behind us and was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly free.
When the sailors saw this and that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud and long-continued.
Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of the tumult.
"They shout," I said, "because they will soon return to England."
"Do you, then, really return?"
"Alas!
Yes; I cannot withstand their demands.
I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must return."
"Do so, if you will; but I will not.
You may give up your purpose, but mine is assigned to me by heaven, and I dare not.
I am weak, but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with sufficient strength."
Saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted.
It was long before he was restored, and I often thought that life was entirely extinct.
At length he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to speak.
The surgeon gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed.
In the meantime he told me that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.
His sentence was pronounced, and I could only grieve and be patient.
I sat by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and I thought he slept; but presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, "Alas!
The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being.
Think not, Walton, that in the last moments of my existence I feel that burning hatred and ardent desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself justified in desiring the death of my adversary.
During these last days I have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do I find it blamable.
In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature and was bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and well-being.
"This was my duty, but there was another still paramount to that.
My duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or misery.
Urged by this view, I refused, and I did right in refusing, to create a companion for the first creature.
He showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know where this thirst for vengeance may end.
Miserable himself that he may render no other wretched, he ought to die.
The task of his destruction was mine, but I have failed.
When actuated by selfish and vicious motives, I asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and I renew this request now, when I am only induced by reason and virtue.
"Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil this task; and now that you are returning to England, you will have little chance of meeting with him.
But the consideration of these points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, I leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near approach of death.
I dare not ask you to do what I think right, for I may still be misled by passion.
"That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I momentarily expect my release, is the only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years.
The forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and I hasten to their arms.
Farewell, Walton!
Seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in science and discoveries.
Yet why do I say this?
I have myself been blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed."
His voice became fainter as he spoke, and at length, exhausted by his effort, he sank into silence.
About half an hour afterwards he attempted again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and his eyes closed forever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from his lips.
Margaret, what comment can I make on the untimely extinction of this glorious spirit?
What can I say that will enable you to understand the depth of my sorrow?
All that I should express would be inadequate and feeble.
My tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of disappointment.
But I journey towards England, and I may there find consolation.
I am interrupted.
What do these sounds portend?
It is midnight; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir.
Again there is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of Frankenstein still lie.
I must arise and examine.
Good night, my sister.
Great God!
what a scene has just taken place!
I am yet dizzy with the remembrance of it.
I hardly know whether I shall have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have recorded would be incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe.
I entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend.
Over him hung a form which I cannot find words to describe--gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its proportions.
As he hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of a mummy.
When he heard the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung towards the window.
Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness.
I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
I called on him to stay.
He paused, looking on me with wonder, and again turning towards the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion.
"That is also my victim!"
he exclaimed.
"In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close!
Oh, Frankenstein!
Generous and self-devoted being!
What does it avail that I now ask thee to pardon me?
I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst.
Alas!
He is cold, he cannot answer me."
His voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion.
I approached this tremendous being; I dared not again raise my eyes to his face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness.
I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips.
The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches.
At length I gathered resolution to address him in a pause of the tempest of his passion.
"Your repentance," I said, "is now superfluous.
If you had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived."
"And do you dream?"
said the daemon.
"Do you think that I was then dead to agony and remorse?
He," he continued, pointing to the corpse, "he suffered not in the consummation of the deed.
Oh!
Not the ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the lingering detail of its execution.
A frightful selfishness hurried me on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse.
Think you that the groans of Clerval were music to my ears?
My heart was fashioned to be susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot even imagine.
"After the murder of Clerval I returned to Switzerland, heart-broken and overcome.
I pitied Frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; I abhorred myself.
But when I discovered that he, the author at once of my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for happiness, that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the indulgence of which I was forever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance.
I recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished.
I knew that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was the slave, not the master, of an impulse which I detested yet could not disobey.
Yet when she died!
Nay, then I was not miserable.
I had cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my despair.
Evil thenceforth became my good.
Urged thus far, I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had willingly chosen.
The completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion.
And now it is ended; there is my last victim!"
I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I called to mind what Frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my friend, indignation was rekindled within me.
"Wretch!"
I said.
"It is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you have made.
You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall.
Hypocritical fiend!
If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance.
It is not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power."
"Oh, it is not thus--not thus," interrupted the being.
"Yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be the purport of my actions.
Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery.
No sympathy may I ever find.
When I first sought it, it was the love of virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to be participated.
But now that virtue has become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy?
I am content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when I die, I am well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory.
Once my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment.
Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would love me for the excellent qualities which I was capable of unfolding.
I was nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion.
But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal.
No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine.
When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness.
But it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil.
Yet even that enemy of God and man had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone.
"You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes.
But in the detail which he gave you of them he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured wasting in impotent passions.
For while I destroyed his hopes, I did not satisfy my own desires.
They were forever ardent and craving; still I desired love and fellowship, and I was still spurned.
Was there no injustice in this?
Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me?
Why do you not hate Felix, who drove his friend from his door with contumely?
Why do you not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the saviour of his child?
Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings!
I, the miserable and the abandoned, am an abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on.
Even now my blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.
"But it is true that I am a wretch.
I have murdered the lovely and the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing.
I have devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin.
"There he lies, white and cold in death.
You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard myself.
I look on the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart in which the imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.
"Fear not that I shall be the instrument of future mischief.
My work is nearly complete.
Neither yours nor any man's death is needed to consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done, but it requires my own.
Do not think that I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice.
I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as I have been.
I shall die.
I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched.
He is dead who called me into being; and when I shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish.
I shall no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks.
"Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my happiness.
Some years ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to me, I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation.
Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death?
"Farewell!
I leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold.
Farewell, Frankenstein!
If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction.
But it was not so; thou didst seek my extinction, that I might not cause greater wretchedness; and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance greater than that which I feel.
Blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my wounds until death shall close them forever.
"But soon," he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, "I shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt.
Soon these burning miseries will be extinct.
I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of the torturing flames.
The light of that conflagration will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds.
My spirit will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
Farewell."
He sprang from the cabin window as he said this, upon the ice raft which lay close to the vessel.
He was soon borne away by the waves and lost in darkness and distance.